 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

File No: 11019/01/2015-Credit-II(pt) 

OPERATIONAL GUIDELINES 

RESTRUCTURED WEATHER BASED CROP 

INSURANCE SCHEME 

March 2016 

Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare 

Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare 

Krishi Bhawan, New Delhi-110001 

1 

 

 

 

File No: 11019/01/2015-Credit-II(pt) 

Weather Based Crop Insurance Scheme (WBCIS)  

Operational Guidelines (OGs)  

 

I.  Objective of the Scheme 

Weather Based Crop Insurance Scheme (WBCIS) aims to mitigate the hardship 
of  the  insured  farmers  against  the  likelihood  of  financial  loss  on  account  of 
anticipated  crop  loss  resulting  from  adverse  weather  conditions  relating  to 
rainfall,  temperature,  wind,  humidity  etc.  WBCIS  uses  weather  parameters  as 
“proxy‟ for crop yields in compensating the cultivators for deemed crop losses. 
Payout structures are developed to the extent of losses deemed to have been 
suffered using the weather triggers.  
 

II.  Coverage of Farmers  

Refer para II of OGs of PMFBY. 
 

III.  Coverage of Crops 

1)  Food Crops (Cereals,  Millets and Pulses) 
2)  Oilseeds 
3)  Commercial / Horticultural crops 

 

IV.  Weather Perils to be Covered 

1.  Following  major  weather  perils,  which  are  deemed  to  cause  “Adverse 
Weather  Incidence”,  leading  to  crop  loss,  shall  be  covered  under  the 
scheme:  
a)  Rainfall  –  Deficit  Rainfall,  Excess  rainfall,  Unseasonal  Rainfall,  Rainy 

days, Dry-spell, Dry days  

b)  Temperature– High temperature (heat), Low temperature  
c)  Relative Humidity  
d)  Wind Speed 
e)  A combination of the above 
f)  Hailstorm,  cloud-burst  may  also  be  covered  as  Add-on/Index-Plus 
products  for  those  farmers  who  have  already  taken  normal  coverage 
under WBCIS. 

The  perils  listed  above  are  only  indicative  and  not  exhaustive  and  any 
addition  /  deletion  may  be  considered  by  State  Govt.  in  consultation  with 
insurance companies based on availability of relevant data.  

2.  State Government shall consider to cover such perils which are capable of 
causing severe & quantifiable loss and can be induced directly or indirectly 
by change in measurable weather parameters to capture the losses during 
the  adverse  climatic  conditions  and  have  demonstrated  correlation  with 
quantifiable yield losses of crop due to such perils. 

3.  Only adverse weather incidences which can cause substantial crop losses 
should only be covered, or the triggers identified in such a way that major 
losses are captured. Too conservative triggers tend to lead to frequent 
but smaller payouts, diluting the indemnity principle of insurance.   

4.  State  Governments  will  also  continue  to  conduct  the  requisite  number  of 
Crop Cutting Experiments (CCEs) in areas where WBCIS is implemented to 
enable  the  implementing  agencies  to  make  analytical  study  for  assessing 

2 

 

 

File No: 11019/01/2015-Credit-II(pt) 

performance  of    the  Scheme  vis-à-vis    yield  Index  based  crop  Insurance 
Schemes (i.e. PMFBY) and Benchmarking of products. 

5.  The  specific  “Adverse  Weather  Incidence”  with  its  timing  /  duration 

applicable to a particular Notified crop shall be notified by the SLCCCI. 
 
 

V.  Period of Risk (i.e. Insurance Period) 

Risk  period  would  ideally  be  from  sowing  period  to  maturity  of  the  crop.  Risk 
period  depending  on the  duration of  the  crop  and  weather  parameters  chosen, 
could vary with individual crop and reference unit area and would be notified by 
SLCCCI before the commencement of risk period. 
 

VI.  Preconditions for Implementation of the Scheme 

Refer para V of OGs of PMFBY. 
 

VII.   Notification 

VIII.  Selection of Areas & Crops 

State/UT  Government  should  ensure  issuance  of  the  notification  and  its 
circulation  to  all  concerned  agencies  /  departments  /  institutions  atleast  one 
month prior to the commencement of the crop season / risk period. Notification 
issued by State government / UT should necessarily contain following details:   

a)  Crops and Reference Unit Areas notified in various districts. 
b)  Applicable Sum Insured, Premium rates, and subsidy etc. 
c) 

Term-sheets / product structures of various crops and Reference Unit 
Areas (RUA)  

d)  Seasonality discipline for various activities.  
e) 

List of Reference and Back-up Weather Stations for each Reference 
Unit Area 
 

1.  SLCCCI  shall,  for  the  purpose  of  selection  of  crops  under  WBCIS, 
consider  factors  such  as  availability  of  historical  weather  data,  minimum 
cropped area, weather perils capable of causing significant & quantifiable 
losses by change in measurable weather parameters etc.   

2.  State Govt. may convene meetings with insurance providers and experts 
of  Agro-meteorology  /  agronomy  from  State  Agriculture  Universities, 
Research  Institutes  etc.  for  finalization  of  triggers,  term-sheets  and  pay-
out  etc.  before  SLCCCI  meeting.  A  Technical  Committee  may  be 
constituted  by  the  State  Government  for  selection  of  crop(s),  area(s), 
weather  triggers  under  WBCIS,  examination  of  proposals  received  from 
the Insurance Companies, and finalization of term-sheets for the proposed 
crop(s) / area(s) based on demonstrated correlation with historical weather 
& yield data and further evaluation of products & benefits to the farmers on 
insurance principles. 
The Scheme shall operate on the principle of “Area Approach” in selected 
notified  RUAs.  Therefore,  State  Govt.  may  notify  the  smallest  possible 
areas as insurance units / RUAs, which should be preferably, the Village 
Panchayat / Revenue Circle / Mandal / Hobli / Block / Tehsil etc. 
 

3. 

  

3 

 

 

File No: 11019/01/2015-Credit-II(pt) 

 
IX.  Notification of the seasonality discipline 

Refer para VI(9) & IX of OGs of PMFBY. 
 

X.  Notification  of  Reference  Weather  Stations  (RWS)  and  Authorized  Data 

providers  

1.  SLCCCI  based on  distance and  location  and  availability  of Automatic Weather 
Stations  /  Rain  Gauge  will  approve  “Reference  Weather  Stations  (RWS)  for 
RUA‟s. In addition to RWS for all RUAs, additional weather stations designated 
as  Back-up  Weather  Stations  (BWS)  shall  be  notified  for  use  in  case  RWS  is 
unable  to  provide  data  for  any  reason.  Information  of  RUAs  along  with  RWS 
and  back  up  weather  stations  shall  be  covered  in  notification  issued  at  the 
commencement  of 
the 
requirements  &standards  as  recommended 
the  committee 
constituted  to  draft  the  Guidelines  for  setting  up  Automatic  Weather  Stations 
(AWSs)  and  Automatic  Rain  Gauges  (ARGs)  by  private  agencies  and  their 
accreditation,  standardization,  validation  and  quality  management  of  weather 
data etc. circulated by this Department in 2015. 

the  season.  Such  AWS  &  ARG  should  meet 

in  report  of 

2.  Any new AWS/ARG including 5000 AWS planned to be established under PPP 
mode with support from Govt. of India, should be set up following the guidelines 
envisaged in the report of the above mentioned committee. 

3.  All claims shall be settled based on actual data recorded by the RWS. There is 
no protocol to revise or make change in the actual weather data recorded by the 
Reference  AWS  (notified).  The  insurance  companies  /  their  data  provider  will 
provide  daily  weather  data  recorded  in  the  notified  AWSs  /  ARGs  to  the  State 
Govt.  on  request  and  they  should  also  be  given  access  to  view  real  time 
weather data of the notified AWSs / ARGs, if so desired.   

 

XI.  Sum Insured 

1.  The Sum Insured (SI) for each notified crop is pre-defined and will be same for 
loanee and non-loanee farmers, which will be based on the ‘Scale of finance’ as 
decided by the District Level Technical Committee. If the scale of finance is not 
declared  by  DLTC  the  sum  insured  will  be  broadly  based  on  the  cost  of 
cultivation of the crops and will be decided by State Government. Sum Insured 
for  individual  farmer  is  equal  to  the  Sum  Insured  multiple  by  acreage  of  the 
notified crop.  ‘Area under cultivation’ shall always be expressed in ‘hectare’. 

2.  The  Sum  Insured  of  the  crop  may  be  distributed  among  the  critical  phases  of 
the crop based on the accumulating input costs in its growing path of the crop 
during  that  phase.  However,  the  sum  insured  assigned  to  the  subsequent 
phases  may  be  the  summation  of  its  previous  phases  to  provide  adequate 
compensation on damage of crop at later stages.  
 

XIII.  Participation of Insurance Companies in Implementation of the Scheme 

XII.   Premium Rates & Premium Subsidy 

Refer para VIII of OGs of PMFBY. 
 

Refer para XXIII of OGs of PMFBY. 
 

XIV. Collection of Proposals and Premium Amount 

Refer para X of OGs of PMFBY.  

 

4 

 

 

XV.Claims Assessment & Settlement 

File No: 11019/01/2015-Credit-II(pt) 

1.  Insurance  company  shall  be  responsible  for  all  claims  arising  out  of  adverse 
weather  incidence  and  shall  settle  claims  strictly  as  per  the  terms  and 
conditions  of  the  scheme  mentioned  in  the  notification.  In  case  of  adverse 
weather incidence all the insured cultivators growing the notified crop in a RUA 
shall be deemed to have suffered the same level of adverse weather condition 
& same proportion of crop loss and become eligible for the same rate of claims. 
2.  Claims  shall  be  assessed  only  on  the  basis  of  weather  data  recorded  by  the 
notified  RWSs  or  BWS,  as  the  case  may  be,  and  the  claims  process  shall 
commence  once  the  weather  data  is  received.    The  weather  data  providers 
should  ensure  that  the  exposure  conditions  of  AWS,  their  standardization  / 
calibration,  maintenance  and  weather  data  transmission  meet  the  guidelines 
issued by the Government. 

3.  Claims  processing  should  be  strictly  as  per  the  insurance  term  sheets,  payout 
structure  and  the  Scheme  provisions.  Claims  shall  be  worked  out  as  per  the 
Insurance  Declarations  received  from  the  Nodal  Branches/  Nodal  Banks  for 
each notified area and crop.  

4.  Administrative  structure  for  collection  of  premium,  insurance  proposal  and 
remittance of admissible claim along with other return will be same as PMFBY. 
(Refer para X of Operational Guidelines of PMFBY) 

5.  All standard Claims should be processed and paid within 45 days from the end 
of  the  risk  period.  Further  verification  &  collection  of  relevant  documents  / 
papers, if required, in respect of affected farmers should be completed within a 
period of 30 days from payment of standard claims of season.  

6.  Insurance  Companies  should  verify  &  satisfy  themselves  about  the  insured 
farmers,  crops  &  areas  before  approaching  the  Government  for  release  of 
Subsidy.  Cases  of  area  discrepancies  under  WBCIS  will  be  settled  as  per 
procedure explained in para XVII(4) of OGs of PMFBY, and such cases should 
be  settled  within  a  maximum  period  of  three  months  from  closing  of  crop 
season. 

7.  Disputed  claims  /  sub-standard  claims,  if  any,  shall  be  referred  through  State 
Government  to  DAC&FW  for  disposal  by  the  insurance  company  and  the 
decision or any interpretation of DAC&FW of provisions of scheme or disputes 
shall be binding on all concerned. 

8.  If observed index value falls below or above, (as the case may be) the notified 
trigger  value,  then  claims  per  unit  shall  be  calculated  using  following  formula 
depending upon index definition:  
 
Claims per Unit = (Difference between Observed & Notified index      
values) X Notional Payout  
Overall claims will be ‘Claims per Unit’  X ‘Number of units’ 
Illustration  
In table below, a farmer having 1, 2 and 3 hectares of land in RUAs  X, Y and Z 
respectively buys an insurance policy having deficit rainfall cover.  
 

Table 1: Deficit Rainfall Cover 

Index  

Cover Phase, From  

 

Aggregate rainfall in mm 
during cover phase  
1-July  

5 

File No: 11019/01/2015-Credit-II(pt) 

 

 

 

                      To 
Strike 1 (mm)  
Strike 2 (mm)  
Exit (mm)  
Standard Loss Rate between Strike 1 
and Strike 2 – Notional 1  
(Rs / mm / Hectare)  
Standard Loss Rate between Strike 2 
and Exit – Notional 2  
(Rs / mm / Hectare)  
Standard loss below Exit 
Policy Limit (Rs / Hectare)  

15-August  
200  
150  
100  
50  

80  

Nil 
6500  

 
In table below actual observed index values are mentioned for 3 notified RUAs 
during the cover period obtained on the basis of data of RWS.  
 

RUA   RWS   Strike-1   Strike-2   Exit   Notional-

X  
Y  
Z  

A  
B  
C  

200  
200  
200  

150  
150  
150  

Table 2 

1  

100   50  
100   50  
100   50  

Notional
-2  

Policy 
Limit  

Observed 
Index  

80  
80  
80  

6500  
6500  
6500  

300  
120  
80  

RUA X: In this case notified trigger value is 200. Observed index value is 300. 
In  this  case  there  would  be  no  claim  payable  as  the  notified  trigger  is  not 
breached.  
RUA Y: Here observed index value is 120.  
Hence, claims per unit will be: {(200-150)*50}+{(150-120)*80} = Rs. 4900.  
For two hectares, overall claim= Rs. 4900 X 2= Rs. 9800/- 
RUA  Z:  Here  observed  index  value  is  80  which  has  breached  the  exit  level. 
Hence in this case the full sum insured assigned to the phase of Rs. 6500 per 
unit would be payable.  
For two hectares, overall claim= Rs. 6500 X 2= Rs. 13000/- 
Using the methodology discussed above, total claims will be worked out. 

 

XVI.  Modalities for assessment of loss due to localized perils of Hailstorm and 

Cloudburst (Add-on / Index-Plus product) 
Refer all sub-paras of para XV of OGs of PMFBY. 
 

XVII. Important Conditions / Clauses Applicable for Coverage of Risks 

1.  In case of any substantial misreporting by bank branch / cooperative nodal bank 
/  PACS  particularly  of compulsory  farmers  coverage,  the  concerned  bank  only 
shall  be  liable for  such misreporting.  Refer para  XXIV.4.  ’e’ of  sub-head  “Lead 
Bank  /  Administrative  Office  of  commercial  banks  /RRBs”  &  ‘f’  of  sub-head 
“Lending Banks/RFIs”.  

2.  Insured 

insurable 

/  applicant  must  have 

/ 
disbursement  of  crop  loans  and  submission  of  proposals  /  declarations  and 
remittance of premium by farmer/ bank, without explicit intent to raise the crop, 
does not constitute acceptance of risk by insurance company.  
 
 

interest.  Mere  sanctioning 

6 

File No: 11019/01/2015-Credit-II(pt) 

 

  

XVIII.  Role & Responsibilities of Various Agencies 

1.  Central Government 
a)  Constitute a Technical Support Unit (TSU) to monitor implementation of WBCIS, 
product structuring, standardization & Benchmarking of products, rationalization 
of  premium  rate  /  subsidy,  issuing  guideline  for  installation  &  accreditation  of 
Weather  Stations,  creation  of  national  grid  for  statistical  data  for  the  purpose 
and other matter / directives to insurance companies. 

b)  Other  role  &  responsibilities  are  same  as  detailed  in  para  XXIV.1.’a’  to  ‘g’  of 

OGs of PMFBY.  

2.  State / UT Governments 
a)  To provide the details of crop calendar and package of practices for the crops 
and the areas under the scheme for the first year. Weather data is required to 
be furnished in the daily format at least for 25 years at the RUA level proposed 
to be notified for the scheme, wherever necessary.    

b)  To  constitute  a  Technical  Committee  with  experts  in  the  relevant  areas  for 
finalization  of  triggers,  term-sheets,  pay-out  etc  before  SLCCCI  meeting  and 
further evaluation of products and benefits to the farmers. 

c)   To facilitate strengthening and expanding the existing automatic weather station 

network so as to facilitate providing the weather data on near real-time basis.  

d)  To  undertake  sufficient  number  of  CCEs  in  the  notified  area  and  provide  the 
yield  data  to  concerned  insurance  companies  for  comparison  with  WBCIS 
particularly  to  establish  correlation  between  yield  and  weather  parameters  to 
help  in  designing  of  better  weather  insurance  products,  standardization  & 
benchmarking of products etc. 

e)  Other  role  &  responsibilities  are  same  as  detailed  in  para  XXIV.2.’a’  to  ‘o’  of 

OGs of PMFBY.  

3.  Insurance Companies (IA) 
a)  Open  a  separate account for  maintaining  all transactions  under  the  scheme  in 

the account for audit by the Government Agency. 

b)  Claims  processing,  finalization  and  payment  of  the  claims  within  45  days  of 

receipt of weather data subject to receipt of Government subsidy.  

c)  Other  role  &  responsibilities  are  same  as  detailed  in  para  XXIV.3.’a’  to  ‘o’  of 

OGs of PMFBY. 

4.  Financial Institutions/Banks 

Nodal bank branches/cooperative nodal banks 

a)  In case, claims have arisen during crop season then respective nodal bank 
&  its  branches  would  be  responsible  to  make  payment  of  the  admissible 
claims  to  loanee  farmers who were  deprived  from  insurance cover  to  their 
crops due to non-deduction of premium by lending banks/branches.  

b)  If  Nodal  banks  keep  the  amount  of  premium  collected  beyond  the  defined 
timelines(Refer  Para  IX  of  OGs  of  PMFBY)  then  they  will  be  liable  to  pay 
interest  (at  prevailing  rate  of  interest  for  saving  account)  for  the  delay 
period to the insurance company. 
If Nodal banks keep the claims amount beyond the defined timelines (Refer 
Para  XVI.3  of  OGs  of  PMFBY)  then  they  will  be  liable  to  pay  interest  (at 
prevailing  rate  of  interest  for  saving  account)  for  the  delay  period  to  the 
eligible farmers. 

c) 

d)  Other  role  &  responsibilities  are  same  as  detailed  in  para  XXIV.4.’a’  to  ‘m’  of 

OGs of PMFBY. 

 

7 

File No: 11019/01/2015-Credit-II(pt) 

 

     Lending Banks / RFIs  

Refer para XXIV.4.’a’ to ‘f’ (second) of OGs of PMFBY.  

5. Designated Insurance agents 

Refer para XXIV.5.’a’ to ‘f’ of OGs of PMFBY.  

6. Loanee farmers 

Refer para XXIV.6.’a’ to ‘d’ of OGs of PMFBY.  

7. Non-Loanee farmers 
  Refer para XXIV.7.’a’ to ‘g’ of OGs of PMFBY.  
8. Role & Responsibilities of Weather data providers 

a) The Automatic Weather Stations (AWSs) and Automatic Rain Gauges (ARGs)  
IMD,  State  Governments,  Agriculture  Universities  or  any  other 
of 
organizations  /  institutions  and  Independent  Third  Parties  like  National 
Collateral Management Services Limited (NCML), Weather Risk Management 
Services  Pvt.  Limited  (WRMS),  Skymet  etc.  should  only  be  notified  as 
Reference  Weather  Stations  (RWSs)  or  Back  up  Weather  Stations  (BWSs) 
which meet the basic minimum criteria fixed by the IMD / Government for the 
purpose. 

b) The data provider should ensure that all the equipments, weather sensors etc. 
of  AWSs  /  ARGs  should  be  standard,  installed  properly  and  regularly 
maintained as per the specification detailed in the Guidelines issued by IMD / 
DAC&FW and the equipments should also be calibrated regularly. 

c) The data provider should maintain the quality of weather data and standards 

for dissemination, retrieval & validation of weather data etc. 

d) The  data  provider  should  work  independent  from  the  insurer  (insurance 

Company) and insured (farmer). 

e) The data provider should provide weather data in prescribed formats on near 

real time basis to insurance companies / State Govt.  

f)  The data provider should ensure that insured farmers may not be deprived of 
any  benefit  under  the  Scheme  due  to  non-functioning  of  weather  sensors  / 
sub-standard  data/  loss  of  data  etc.  and  if  any,  the  concerned  agency  shall 
only make good all such losses. 

g) The  data  provider  should  get  the  weather  station  equipment,  exposure 
conditions,  maintenance,  data  quality,  etc.  certified  by  an  accreditation 
agency,  who  may  randomly  visit  some  of  the  weather  stations  from  time  to 
time. 
 

XIX.   Illustration for preparation of Term sheet 

Crop  season  is  segregated  into  3-4  phases  according  to  important  activities 
taking  place  in  growth  cycle  of  the  crop  (i.e.  critical  stages).    For  example,  if 
rainfall period is from 15th June to 31st August. The requirement of rain (water) 
by the crop plant may also vary fortnightly (i.e. 1-15th July, 15-31st July, 1-15th 
August, 16-31st August, 1-15th September and so on) or monthly or such other 
period  that  the  State  Government  decides.    Therefore,  the  requirement  of 
rainfalls  /  weather  parameters  should  be  assessed  for  each  fortnight  /  month 
according  to  historical  data.  The  pay-out  trigger(s)  should  be  fixed  strictly 
according to demonstrated correlation with requirement of weather parameters 
to the crop at each critical stages and also soil types, topography etc. Product 
outlines of such product are given below: 

 

8 

 

 

File No: 11019/01/2015-Credit-II(pt) 

 
 
 
 
1. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
2. 

WEATHER BASED CROP INSURANCE SCHEME  

TERM SHEET                                                                             SEASON 
State:    A                 District: B                              Tehsil:  C 
 
Crop: D                                  RAU:     E                                            
Reference Weather Station: F 
 

DEFICIT RAINFALL 

                                               PHASE-I             PHASE-II         PHASE-III 
  21st August 

  21st July to 

PERIOD 

RAINFALL 
VOLUME 

15th June 
to 20th July 

TRIGGER 

50 mm 

 

RAINFALL 
DISTRIBUTION 
(Consecutive 
Dry Days) 

No. of consecutive Dry Days 

 

PERIOD 

TRIGGER DAYS(>=) 
20 

20th 

August 
80 mm 

to 25th  

September 

80 mm 

 

 

1St July to 5th 
September 

24 

        Note: Rainfall of less than 2.5 mm in a day shall not be considered 
as a rainy day 

 

 

 

EXCESS RAINFALL 
ON A SINGLE DAY 

PERIOD 

 
     15th July  to  15th August 
200 mm 

TRIGGER 
(>) 

 

If  rainfall  period  is  from  15th  July  to  31st  October,  the  requirement  of  rain 
(water)  by  the  crop  plant  may  also  vary  fortnightly  (i.e.  15-31st  July,  1-15th 
August, 16-31st August, 1-15th September and so on) or monthly or such other 
period that the State Government decides on prevailing weather condition. 
 

TERMSHEET FOR WEATHER BASED CROP INSURANCE SCHEME 

 
CROP   
STATE  
District  
Tehsil   
Reference Weather Station: E (IMD) 

: A 
: B 
: C 
: D 

 
 
 
 

INDEX – A (Excess Rainfall Cover) 

Maximum of cumulative rainfall in mm of any 2 consecutive days during 
the cover period 
Cover Phase,        From 
                                To 
Strike 1 (mm) 

1-Sep 
30-Sep 
33 

15-Jul 
31-Aug 
80 

1-Oct 
31-Oct 
15 

9 

 

 

 

File No: 11019/01/2015-Credit-II(pt) 

Strike 2 (mm) 
Exit (mm) 
Standard Loss Rate between Strike 
1 and Strike 2-Notional 1 
(Rs/mm/Hectare) 
Standard Loss Rate between Strike 
2  and Exit-Notional 2 
(Rs/mm/Hectare) 
Policy Limit (Rs/Hectare) 

175 
285 
 
7.37 

95 
200 
 
6.45 

45 
134 
 
9.67 

20.91 

24.76 

30.45 

3000 

3000 

3000 

INDEX B (Deficit Rainfall Cover) 

Aggregate rainfall during the cover phases in mm 
Cover Phase,              From 
                                      To 
Strike 1 (mm) 
Strike 2 (mm) 
Exit (mm) 
Standard Loss Rate between Strike 1 and 
Strike 2-Notional 1 (Rs/mm/Hectare) 
Standard Loss Rate between Strike 2  and 
Exit-Notional 2 (Rs/mm/Hectare) 
Policy Limit (Rs/Hectare) 
 

24 

25-Jun 
15-Aug 
475 
270 
25 
7 

16-Aug 
30-Sep 
200 
95 
10 
21 

62 

7500 

7500 

Maximum Number of Consecutive Dry Days (CDD) where dry day is a 

INDEX C (Consecutive Dry Days) 

day with rainfall less than equal to 2.5mm 

Cover Phase,                         From 
                                                  To 
Strike 1 (CDD’s) 
Strike 2 (CDD’s) 
Strike 3 (CDD’s) 
Strike 4 (CDD’s) 
Exit (CDD’s) 
Payout 1 (Rs/Hectare) for Strike 1 < CDD<=Strike 2  328 
Payout 2 (Rs/Hectare) for Strike 2 <CDD <=Strike 3  720 
Payout 3 (Rs/Hectare) for Strike 3 <CDD<=Strike 4 
Payout 4 (Rs/Hectare) for Strike 4 <CDD<=Exit 
Maximum Payout (RS/Hectare) for CDD > Exit 

1800 
3600 
6000 

15-July 
31-August 
4 
10 
14 
19 
24 

Combined Policy Limit (Rs/Hectare) –say 
Premium (Rs/Hectare)   say 
Farmer’s Share (Rs/Hectare) say 

30,000 
3,000 
750 

Backup reference Weather Stations:   X 
 
Data Source: IMD /Independent third party like NCMSL, SKYMET, etc.  
 
Settlement Date: Within Thirty days from the data released by data provider. 
 

10 

 

 

 

 

 

 

File No: 11019/01/2015-Credit-II(pt) 

Other  Terms  &  Conditions:  The  Operational  Guidelines  /  Administrative 
Approval  and  other  instructions  issued  by  DAC&FW  and  State Government 
from time to time.  
    

XX.  Other provisions are same as envisaged under Operational Guidelines of 

PMFBY 

Coconut Palm Insurance Scheme (CPIS) 

There  are no  changes  in  the  Operational  Guidelines  of  CPIS  issued  earlier  by 
this  Department  vide  letter  No.  13015/02/2012-Credit  II  dated  4th  February, 
2014. 

****** 

 

 

****** 

11 

 

 

