 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

“RIGHT TO INFORMATION ACT, 2005” 

Compendium of Manuals 

(Proactive Disclosure under  Section-4) 

Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation 

Government of India 

Khurshid Lal Bhawan, 

Janpath, 

New Delhi-110001 

Website: http://www.mospi.gov.in 

As on 01.03.2024

1 

C O N T E N T S 

Manual 1  

  The particulars of organization, functions and duties 

Manual 2  

  The powers and duties of officers and employees 

Manual 3  

  Channel of supervision and level of disposal of cases 

Manual 4  

  The norms set by the Ministry for the discharge of its functions 

Manual 5       

List  of  rules,  regulations,  instructions,  manuals  and  records  for 
discharging  functions  available  with  the  public  authority  for  the 
 
smooth discharge of its functions 

Manual  6                          Statement  in  respect  of  the  categories  of  documents  held  by  this 

Ministry 

3-15 

16-23 

24-26 

27-31 

32-33 

          34-37 

 

Manual  7                  Particulars  of  any  arrangement  that  exists  for  consultation  with  or 
representation  by  the  members  of  the  public  in  relation  to  the 
formulation of its policy of implementation.                                                                               

38 

Manual 8          

A  statement  of  the  boards,  councils,  committees  and  other  bodies 
consisting  of  two  or  more  persons  constituted  as  its  part  or  for  the 
 
purpose  of  its  advice,  and  as  to  whether  meetings  of  those  boards, 
councils,  committees  and  other  bodies  are  open  to  the  public,  or  the  
 
minutes of such meetings are accessible for public.                    

39-51 

Manual 9  

  Directory of officers and employees                                                                     52-64 

Manual 10  

 

Posts and Pay Scales                                                                                              65-66

Manual 12     

The  manner  of  execution  of  subsidy  programmes,  including  the 
amounts  allocated  and 
the  details  of  beneficiaries  of  such 
programmes.                                                                                      

Manual 13       

Particulars  of  recipients  of  concessions,  permits  or  authorizations 
granted                                                                                                              

Manual 14        

Details  in  respect  of  the  information,  available  to  or  held  by  by  this 
Ministry, reduced in an electronic form                                      

71-73  

Manual 15     

The  particulars  of  facilities  available  to  citizens  for  obtaining 
information,  including  the  working  hours  of  a  library  or  reading 
room, if maintained for public use                                            

Manual 16         

List  of  the  designated  Central  Public  Information  Officers/Assistant 
Public  Information  Officers  and  the  Appellate  Authority   

Manual 17            Such other information as may be prescribed                               

Annexure-I             Organisation Charts                                                        

 

 

Annexure-II        Dos and Don’ts for Central Public Information Officer (CPIO)                       88-92

67-68   

69  

70   

74  

75-80               

81               

82-87              

2 

 

 

Manual 11           

The budget allocated to each of agency, indicating the particulars of 
all plans, proposed expenditures and reports on disbursements made.                                                                                                                       

Manual- 1 

Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation 

Khurshid Lal Bhawan, Janpath Road, 

New Delhi-110001 

Website: - http://mospi.gov.in 
Right to Information Act, 2005 

 

 

OUR VISION 

The particulars of organization, functions and duties 

To be the best and most innovative National Statistical System in the world; and to 

Effectively Monitor the Programmes and Projects for ensuring efficient use of 

National Resources. 

NSSTA: NSSTA (erstwhile know as NASA) is to be a Center of Excellence in imparting 

training on Official Statistics and undertaking research activities thereto. 

                                              INTRODUCTION 

1)  The  Ministry  of  Statistics  and  Programme  Implementation  (MoSPI)  came  into 
existence  as  an  independent  Ministry  on  15th  October,  1999  after  the  merger  of  the 
Department  of  Statistics  and  the  Department  of  Programme  Implementation.  The 
ministry  is  the  nodal  agency  for  the  planned  and  organized  development  of  the 
statistical system in the country and coordination of statistical activities among different 
stakeholders  in  Government  of  India,  State  Governments  as  well  as  meeting 
requirements of the International Agencies. The Ministry has two wings, viz. Statistics 
Wing,  called  National  Statistics  Office  (NSO)  and  Programme  Implementation  (PI) 
Wing.  The  Programme  Implementation  Wing  has  two  Divisions,  namely  (i) 
Infrastructure  and  Project  Monitoring  and  (ii)  Members  of  Parliament  Local  Area 
Development  Scheme.  Besides  these  two  wings,  there  is  a  National  Statistical 
Commission  (NSC)  created  through  a  Resolution  of  Government  of  India  and  one 
autonomous  institute  viz.  Indian  Statistical  Institute  (ISI)  which  is  declared  as  an 
institute  of  national  importance  by  an  Act  of  Parliament,  known  as  “Indian  Statistical 
Institute Act No. 057 of 1959”. 

2)  The  Ministry  of  Statistics  and  Programme  Implementation  attaches  considerable 
importance to coverage and quality aspects of statistics released in the country and uses 
technology  to  achieve  the  same.  The  statistics  released  by  the  Ministry  are  based  on 
administrative  sources,  surveys  and  censuses  conducted  by  the  Central  and  State 
Governments  and  non-official  sources  and  studies.  The  surveys  conducted  by  the 
Ministry are based on scientific sampling methods and are supervised by  the National 
Statistical  Commission.  Data  is  collected  through  dedicated  field  staff  who  are 
regularly  trained  in  the  concepts  and  definitions  of  the  items  and  the  scope  of  the 
survey.  In line  with  the  emphasis  on the quality  of statistics released by the Ministry, 

3 

 
 

 

 

the  methodological  issues  concerning  the  compilation  of  national  accounts  are  over 
seen  by  an  Advisory  Committee  on  National  Accounts,  industrial  statistics  by  a 
Standing  Committee  on  Industrial  Statistics  and  price  and  cost  of  living  indices  by  a 
Technical Advisory Committee on Price Indices. The Ministry compiles data sets based 
on current data, after applying standard statistical techniques and extensive scrutiny and 
supervision. 
 

3)  The  Administration  Division  of  the  Ministry  functions  as  the  Cadre  Controlling 
Authority  of  offices  of  Indian  Statistical  Service  (ISS)  and  Subordinate  Statistical 
Service (SSS) cadres including matters relating to their training, career progression and 
manpower planning. 

4)  ISS  Division  deals  with  the  different  types  of  works  like  Recruitment  &  Recruitment 
Rules,  Joining  of  DRs,  Transfer  &  Posting,  Promotions,  Deputation,  Empanelment, 
APARs,  Court  Cases,  Cadre  Review,  Grant  of  NFU/NFSG,  RTI  and  various  service 
matters of ISS Officers. 

5)  This  Ministry  also  acts  as  the  Nodal  Ministry  for  the  Indian  Statistical  Institute  (ISI) 
and  ensures  its  functioning  in  accordance  with  the  provisions  of  the  Indian  Statistical 
Institute Act, 1959 (Act No. 57 of 1959). It also administers the Collection of Statistics 
Act, 2008 (Act No. 7 of 2009) 

6)  The Allocation of Business to the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation 
of  the  Ministry  has  been  designed,  created  and  is  being  maintained  by  the  Computer 
Centre  within  Data  Informatics  and  Innovation  Division  of  NSO  of  the  Ministry.  A 
large  number  of  reports  of  the  Ministry  are  available  on  the  website  for access/use  of 
various  stakeholders.  System  of  on-line  registration  has  also  been  introduced  for 
downloading/viewing the reports. 
 

7)  Statistics  Day:  In  recognition  of  the  notable  contributions  made  by  (Late)  Professor 
Prasanta  Chandra  Mahalanobis  in  the  field  of  economic  planning  and  statistical 
development, the Government of India has designated 29th June every year, coinciding 
with  his  birth  anniversary,  as  the  Statistics  Day  in  the  category  of  Special  Days  to  be 
celebrated at the national level. The objective of this Day is to create public awareness, 
among the people specially the younger generation for drawing inspiration from (Late) 
Prof.  Mahalanobis  about  the  role  of  statistics  in  socio-economic  planning  and  policy 
formulation. 
 

8)  The National  Accounts  Division  (NAD) of the NSO is responsible for preparation of 
national  accounts,  which  include  the  estimates  of  Gross  Domestic  Product  (GDP), 
National  Income,  Government/Private  Final  Consumption  Expenditure,  Capital 
Formation  and  Saving  along  with  details  of  transactions  of  institutional  sectors.  NAD 
annually brings out a publication titled “National Accounts Statistics”, containing these 

 

 

 

 

4 

statistics.  NAD  releases  annual  and  quarterly  estimates  of  Gross  Domestic  Product 
(GDP)  from  time  to  time  as  per  pre-specified  schedule  given  in  Advance  Release 
Calendar. 

9)  The  Consumer  Price  Index  (CPI)  is  designed  to  measure  the  changes  over  time  in 
general level of retail prices of selected goods and services that household purchase for 
the purpose of consumption. CPI numbers are widely used as macroeconomic indicator 
of  inflation,  and  also  as  a  tool  by  government  and  Reserve  Bank  of  India  (RBI)  for 
targeting  inflation  and  monitoring  price  stability.  CPI  is  also  used  as  deflators  in  the 
National Accounts. The Reserve Bank of India (RBI) uses CPI, released by MoSPI, as 
measure  of  inflation  for  its  bimonthly  monetary  policy  announcement.  The  NSO, 
MoSPI  releases  data  on  Inflation  and  CPI  on  12th  of  every  month  (on  next  working 
day, in case of 12th being a holiday). Therefore, time lag in release of this data is only 
12 days. The release contains State-wise comprehensive inflation figures for the usage 
of various stakeholders. 

10) International Comparison Programme (ICP) is the largest statistical initiative in the 
world under the aegis of United Nations Statistics Division (UNSD). The World Bank 
is  implementing  this  programme  at  global  level  and  Asian  Development  Bank  is  the 
nodal implementing agency at Asia Pacific Region. The main objectives of ICP are to 
produce  Purchasing  Power  Parities  (PPPs)  and  Price  level  indices  and  to  convert 
volume and per capita measures of GDP into common currencies using PPPs. India has 
been participating in ICP since 1970 and MoSPI is the nodal agency to represent India 
in  this  Programme.  The  Price  Statistics  Division  (PSD)  of  National  Staistics  Office, 
MoSPI  is  responsible  for  providing  data  to  ADB  for  inter-country  validations  and 
compilation of PPP etc. The data for ICP is collected from different sources including 
Field  Operations  Division  (FOD)  of  MoSPI,  Central  Public  Works  Department 
(CPWD),  Engineers  India  Limited  (EIL),  administrative  data  sources  available  with 
Ministries etc. 

11) The  Social  Statistics  Division  (SSD)  of  NSO  developed  a  National  Indicator 
Framework  (NIF)  for  Sustainable  Development  Goals  (SDGs)  with  identified  data 
sources  and  periodicity  for  facilitating  the  monitoring  of  the  SDGs  at  national  level. 
The  framework  is  dynamic  in  nature  and  is  reviewed  and  refined  every  year.  The 
division  also  compiles  Environment  Account  using  United  Nations  System  of 
Environmental  Economic  Accounting  Framework  (UN  SEEA  Framework).  The 
division  also  collates  and  compiles  statistical  information  on  social,  environment  and 
multi-domain statistics and brings out various publications to provide data at one-place 
to facilitate policy makers and researchers.  
 

12) India  is  a  subscriber  to  the  International  Monetary  Fund’s  (IMF)  Special  Data 
Dissemination  Standards  (SDDS)  and  is  currently  fulfilling  the  Standards.  The 
Ministry maintains an ‘Advance Release Calendar’ for its data categories covered under 
the  SDDS,  which  is  disseminated  on  the  Ministry’s  website  as  well  as  on  the 

 

 

 

 

5 

Dissemination Standards Bulletin Board (DSBB) of the IMF. The Ministry releases the 
datasets  covered  under  the  Real  Sector  of  SDDS  through  press  notes  and  its  web-site 
simultaneously.   

                                                            

13)  The  Ministry  is  entrusted  with  the  development  of  indicator  framework  for 
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) in India to facilitate monitoring of SDGs. The 
Ministry organises technical meetings on a regular basis on various topics to assess the 
data-gaps  in  the  system  and  the  quality  of  statistics  currently  released.  The  NSO  staff 
participates  in  meetings  and  seminars  organized  by  international  and  regional 
organizations,  such  as,  the  United  Nations  Economic  and  Social  Commission  for  Asia 
and  the  Pacific  (UNESCAP),  on  statistical  compilations  and  international  practices. 
India has a strong system of official statistics and is among the leading countries in the 
area of official statistics. The Ministry’s officials have been associated with international 
agencies  on  the  development  of  methodologies,  particularly  in  the  areas  of  national 
accounts,  informal  sector  statistics,  large-scale  sample  surveys,  conduct  of  censuses, 
service  sector  statistics,  non-observed  economy,  social  sector  statistics,  environmental 
statistics and classifications. The contribution of the Ministry’s officials in international 
meetings on these subjects has been highly appreciated. 

 
14)  Policy  Implementation  and  Monitoring  Division  (PIMD)  has  the  following 

functions: 

 
(i). To  steer  and  oversee  implementation  of  various  components  of  the  proposed  National 
Policy on Official Statistics through the functional Divisions of NSO/Ministries where 
ever applicable. 

(ii). To  put  in  place  a  governance  structure,  i.e.,  policies,  directives  guidelines,  practices 
and tools that will support acquisition, management and efficient use of administrative 
data. 

(iii). To Coordinate with other Departments/ Ministries (through the Statistical Advisors) in 
examining  the  statistical  potential  of  the  administrative  records  held  by  those 
organizations to help in building statistical requirements into administrative system then 
creation or redeveloping their administrative records system. 

(iv). To  examine  the  legal  framework  that  exist  with  regard  to  access  of  data  from  the 

custodial organization. 

(v).  To  examine  the  policies  on  privacy,  information  management  and  sharing  of 

information among government departments. 

(vi). To  lay  down  principles  and  protocols  that  explicitly  addresses  the  statistical  use  of 

 

 

 

 

 

 

data. 

 

6 

(vii).  To establish inter-ministerial statistical liaison group as a forum for statistical issues 

of common interest, including the statistical use administrative data. 

(viii). Developing  approaches  to  statistical  data  integration  and  promoting  common  data 

quality frameworks and tools. 

(ix). To  explore  the  potential  of  linking  administrative  data  to  survey  data  or  other 
administrative data, or linking administrative data longitudinally to promote the concept 
of statistical data integration. 

 

 

 

(x).  To  facilitate  creation  of  repository  of  information  including  meta  data  about 

administrative datasets available with all the Ministries/Departments within MoSPI. 

 
15)  Economic  Statistics  Division  (ESD) compiling and releasing the Index of Industrial 
Production (IIP) every month in the form of ‘quick estimates’; conducting the Annual 
Survey of Industries (ASI); and providing statistical information to assess and evaluate 
the  changes  in  the  growth,  composition  and  structure  of  the  organised  manufacturing 
sector;  maintains  and  updates  Economic  Classifications  like  the  National  Industrial 
Classification  (NIC),  National  Product  Classification  –  Manufacturing  Sector 
(NPCMS)  and  National  Product  Classification  –  Services  Sector  (NPCSS).  Releases 
annual  publication  of  Energy  Statistics,  conducts  the  Annual  Survey  of  Industries 
(ASI).  
 

16) Computer  Centre  was  set  up  in  1967  under  the  then  Department  of  Statistics  in  the 
Cabinet  Secretariat  to  meet  the  data  processing  needs  of  various  Government 
Ministries/Departments/Organizations  and  Public  Sector  Undertakings  located  in  and 
around Delhi.  

Computer  Centre  is  headed  by  Additional  Director  General.  The  Centre  now  works 
mainly  on  cloud-based  IT  infrastructure.  The  Centre  also  has  servers  located  in  the 
premise on which few of the applications are hosted. 

Some of the important functions of Computer Centre are as follows: - 

•  Design, Development and Maintenance of the Ministry’s website 

•  CPI  Archival  Web  Portal  Software  application,  developed  by  Computer  Centre,  is 
operational for easy retrieval of CPI data.  After the monthly press release, details are 
uploaded on CPI Web Portal.  

•  Data  Documentation,  Archiving  &  Dissemination  of  Microdata  and  Metadata  in 
International  standard  using  IHSN  toolkit.  Microdata  is  Disseminated  in  different 
formats  -  SPSS  (*.sav),  Stata  (*.dta),  SAS  (*.sas),  Statistica   (*.sta),  Dbase  (*.dbf), 
Fixed format ASCII (*.dat), Delimited text  (*.txt). 

• 

 NIC  Cloud  Services  (Meghraj)  -  Benefits  of  NIC  Cloud  Services  are  being 
harnessed,  and  various  web  applications  of  the  Ministry  including  CPI  Rural,  CPI 

 

7 

Urban,  Online  stationery  Management,  MPLADS,  Gatividhi  Dashboard  -  Activity 
Management  System,  UDP  (Unified  Data  Portal),  International  Household  Survey 
Network  (IHSN)  etc.  are  hosted  on  NIC  cloud.  This  minimizes  the  cost  of 
infrastructure & manpower and ensures better security. 

•  Statistical Data Metadata Exchange (SDMX)  - SDMX is an international initiative 
aimed  at  developing  and  employing  more  efficient  processes  for  the  exchange  and 
sharing of statistical data and metadata among international organisations and member 
countries.  MoSPI  has  converted  i)  the  Quarterly  estimates  of  GDP  at  Current  and 
Constant  Prices  (viz.  2011-12  prices)  for  the  periods  2011-12  (Q1)  to  latest  Quarter 
into  SDMX  format  using  SDMX-RI  (Reference  Infrastructure)  tool  and  available  on 
Ministry’s Website. ii) CPI Month wise (from April 2023 to latest month) into SDMX 
format using SDMX-RI (Reference Infrastructure) tool and is available on Ministry’s 
Website. 

•  Compendium  of  Datasets/  Registries  -  MoSPI  has  released  the  next  version  of 

Compendium of Datasets and Registries in India, 2023. 

•  Gatividhi  dashboard  has also  been developed  for use by the senior management of 
MoSPI in order to track the timely progress of various activities being undertaken by 
various Division.  

•  Conducting  IT  Training  -  Support  NSSTA  with  well  qualified  and  experienced 
faculties for conducting IT courses for ISS probationers. Centre provide internship to 
the students pursuing Post Graduation/Research in Statistics and allied subjects under 
summer  Internship  Scheme  sponsored  by  Training  division,  MoSPI.  This  Division 
also  provided 
the  students  sponsored by various  Universities/ 
Institutions for developing IT related projects. 

internship 

to 

•  Operation of a Mini Data Centre and maintenance of MoSPI’s IT assets.  

 

Website  Address  (http://www.mospi.gov.in):-  The  Web-site  of  the  Ministry  of 
Statistics  and  Programme  Implementation  is  being  maintained  by  the  Computer 
Centre.  The  Press  Releases  are  uploaded  on  the  same  day.  Other  materials  are  also 
uploaded  in  the  shortest  possible  time  after  necessary  editing  and  preparation.  The 
Centre has uploaded all the latest reports brought out by the Ministry (more than 1500) 
on  its  website.  Any  user  either  within  the  country  or  from  outside  the  country  can 
access these reports. 

17) PI WING (Programme Implementation Wing): 

The Programme Implementation Wing of the Ministry has the following responsibilities: - 

8 

 

 

 

(i) 

Monitoring  the  performance  of  the  country’s  key  infrastructure  sectors,  viz.,  Power, 
Coal,  Steel,  Railways, Telecommunications, Ports, Fertilizers, Cement, Petroleum  & 
Natural Gas, Road, Transport and Highways and Civil Aviation; 

(ii)  Monitoring of all Central Sector Projects costing Rs.150 crore and above; and  
(iii)  To  facilitate  and  monitor  the  implementation  of  Member  of  Parliament  Local  Area 

• 

• 

Development Scheme (MPLADS). 
 
The  Members  of  Parliament  Local  Area  Development  Division  (MPLADS)  is 
entrusted  with  the  responsibility  of  implementation  of  Members  of  Parliament  Local 
Area  Development  Scheme  (MPLADS).   An  amount  of     Rs.  5.00  Crore  annual 
released to the concerned MP of Lok Sabha/Rajya Sabha Constituency of their Nodal 
District.  
The  main  objective  of  the  Scheme  is  to  enable  each  Member  of  Parliament  to 
recommend works of developmental nature with  emphasis  on the creation of durable 
community assets based on the locally felt needs of the people. 

•  Ministry  of  Statistics  and  Programme  Implementation  is  responsible  for  prescribing 
Guidelines on how the Scheme would be implemented and monitored by the various 
authorities. 
It  shall  regularly  monitor  the  implementation  of  the  MPLADS,  including  overall 
position of funds released, cost of works sanctioned, funds utilized, etc. 
It  shall hold  a meeting  with  all the State/  UT Governments  at  least  once in  a  year to 
review the implementation of the MPLAD Scheme. 

• 

• 

18) NSSTA 

 
National  Statistical  Systems  Training  Academy  (NSSTA),  then  National  Academy  of 
Statistical  Administration  (NASA)  under  Ministry  of  Statistics  and  Programme 
Implementation  (MoSPI),  came  into  being  on  13th  February,  2009  for  imparting 
training  on  Official  Statistics  and  related  disciplines  and  undertaking  associated 
research  activities.  Its  mandate  includes  imparting  training  in  the  field  of  “Official 
Statistics”  to  the  statistical  personnel,  not  only  of  the  Central  and  State/UTs 
Governments  of  the  country  but  also  of  the  developing  countries  in  the  Asia  Pacific 
region.  
 
The training programmes are meant  for different target  Groups viz. fresh recruits  and 
in-service  officers  of  Indian  Statistical  Service  (ISS),  Subordinate  Statistical  Service 
(SSS), State Governments Statistical Personnel; M. Stat. Students of Indian Statistical 
Institute;  UG/PG  students  and  Professors  of  Statistics  of  different  Universities; 
International  Participants;  International  Students  of  International  Statistical  Education 
Centre  (ISEC);  SAARC participants  and  need  based/  request  based  statistical  training 
for State Officials and other developing countries. 

 

 

 

9 

  

 

 

 

 

19) NATIONAL SAMPLE SURVEY OFFICE (NSSO): 

The National Sample Survey Office (NSSO) in Ministry of Statistics & Programme 
Implementation is responsible for conduct of large-scale sample surveys on All India basis 
on  various  socio-economic  issues  to  generate  statistics  and  provide  statistical  products 
necessary for various planning and decision- making exercises of the Government. Primary 
data  are  collected  through  nation-wide  household  surveys  on  various  socio-economic 
subjects,  Annual  Survey  of  Industries  (ASI),  Periodic  Labour  Force  Survey  (PLFS), 
Annual  Survey  of  Unincorporated  Sector  Enterprises  (ASUSE)  and  price  collection  for 
compilation  of  Consumer  Price  Index  (Rural/Urban/Combined),  Consumer  Price  Index 
(Agricultural/Rural Labourers) on regular basis and facilitates collection and transmission 
of price data from manufacturing units/factories for compilation of Wholesale Price Index. 
Besides  these  surveys,  NSSO  also  plays  a  significant  role  in  the  improvement  of  crop 
statistics  through  supervision  of  the  area  enumeration  and  crop  estimation  surveys  of  the 
State  agencies.    It  also  maintains  and  updates  frame  of  urban  area  units  for  drawing 
samples from the urban area for the household surveys. 
 
NSSO functions with requisite autonomy in matters relating to data collection, processing 
and publication/dissemination of results/data based on its surveys. Director General (NSS) 
is  responsible  for  overall  coordination  and  supervision  of  all  activities  of  NSSO  who  is 
assisted  by  four  Additional  Director  Generals,  each  one  being  in-charge  of  a  separate 
Division responsible for distinct aspects of large-scale surveys viz. designing & planning, 
field work/data collection, data processing and coordination between different Divisions of 
NSSO. 

DIVISIONS OF NSSO 

Survey Coordination Division (SCD) headquartered at Delhi coordinates all the activities 
of different Divisions of NSSO viz. SDRD, FOD and DPD. It also functions as Secretariat 
to DG (NSS). Besides, SCD is also responsible for organizing National Seminar to discuss 
the  survey  results  of  various  surveys  conducted  by  the  NSSO.  It  also  publishes  the 
technical  journal  of  NSSO  namely  ‘Sarvekshana’  which  includes  research  papers  on 
various socio-economic surveys of NSSO. 
 
Survey  Design  and  Research  Division  (SDRD)  located  at  Kolkata,  is  responsible  for 
technical  planning  of  surveys,  formulation  of  sample  design,  designing  of  enquiry 
schedules,  formulation  of  concepts  and  definitions,  drawing  of  tabulation  plan,  analysis 
and presentation of results and preparation of survey reports. 
 
Field  Operations  Division  (FOD)  with  its  headquarters  at  Delhi  with  Agriculture 
Statistics (AS) wing in Faridabad and a network of 6 Zonal  Offices, 53 Regional Offices 
and  116  Sub-Regional  Offices  spread  throughout  the  country,  is  responsible  for  the 
collection of primary data for the surveys undertaken by MoSPI. 
 
Data  Processing  Division  (DPD)  has  its  headquarters  at  Kolkata.  It  has  six  Data 
Processing Centers located at Ahmedabad, Bengaluru, Kolkata, Delhi, Giridih and Nagpur. 
It  is  responsible  for  sample  selection,  software  development  and  processing,  online 

10 

checking of survey data quality & tabulation of the data collected through surveys. It also 
assists the States in providing technical support for their data processing related activities 
as  also  through  periodic  training/workshop  and  other  interactive  methods.  Industrial 
Statistics  (IS)  Wing  also  works  under  this  Division.  The  main  function  of  IS  Wing  is 
finalizing  sample  design,  data  validation,  data  processing  and  finalizing  results  of  the 
Annual  Survey  of  Industries  (ASI)  which  is  one  of  the  sources  of  Industrial  Statistics  in 
India. The ASI data are collected and maintained through dedicated ASI Web Portal which 
leads  to  data  accuracy  and  time  saving.  The  portal  helps  to  collect  ASI  data  in  a  timely, 
transparent and reliable manner in a secured environment without any physical movement 
of the schedules. 

SURVEYS OF NSSO 

 

Periodic Labour Force Survey (PLFS): PLFS is conceptualized to produce periodic data 
on key labour force indicators to  cater to  the need of policy makers and researchers. The 
objective of PLFS is primarily of two-fold viz. (i) to measure the labour force indicators in 
the  short  time  interval  of  three  months  for  the  urban  areas  in  the  Current  Weekly  Status 
(CWS) and (ii) to generate estimates of all important labour force parameters in both usual 
status  (principal  status+  subsidiary  status)  and  CWS  annually  for  both  rural  and  urban 
areas. PLFS is a continuous survey undertaken by the Ministry since 2017 and the result of 
the survey is  released in the form  of Quarterly  Bulletin (urban)  and Annual  Report (both 
urban and rural sectors). The survey is conducted in CAPI platform through tablets by field 
enumerators.  Till  now  20  QBs  and  6  Annual  reports  of  PLFS  have  been  released.  Latest 
annual report of PLFS for the period July 2022- June 2023 has been released in October, 
2023.The following QBs of PLFS have been released in 2023: 

S.no. 

1.   
2.   
3.   
4.   

Quarterly Bulletin (QBs) (survey period) 
QB October – December, 2022 
QB January –March, 2023 
QB April – June, 2023 
QB July-September, 2023 

Release date 
February, 2023 
May, 2023 
October, 2023 
November, 2023 

Time Use Survey (TUS): Time Use Survey (TUS) has been conceptualized to gauge the 
time  use  pattern  of  individuals  to  meet  the  requirement  of  different  stakeholders.  The 
primary  objective  of  Time  Use  Survey  (TUS)  is  to  measure  participation  of  men  and 
women in paid and unpaid activities. TUS is an important source of information on thetime 
spent  in  unpaid  caregiving  activities,  volunteer  work,  unpaid  domestic  service  producing 
activities  of  the  household  members.  It  also  provides  information  on  time  spent  on 
learning, socializing, leisure activities, self-care activities, etc., by the household members. 
The first Time Use Survey (TUS) was conducted during January- December, 2019. Report 
of that survey named as “Time use in India – 2019” has been released. The next TUS has 
been launched in January, 2024. 
 

 
 

 

 
 

 

11 

to 

on 

the 

and 

have 

operational 

information 

Annual  Survey  of  Unincorporated  Sector  Enterprises  (ASUSE):  Annual  Survey  of 
Unincorporated  Sector  Enterprises  (ASUSE)  will  provide  information  on  unincorporated 
sector  enterprises  of  the  country  to  meet  the  requirements  of  the  stakeholders.  ASUSE  is 
designed 
economic 
characteristics of this sector for  effective  policy  formulation.  At  the  same  time,  the 
estimates generated from this survey could be used in National Accounts. The first annual 
survey, namely, ASUSE 2021-22 was launched from April, 2021 and continued till March, 
2022. Thereafter, ASUSE 2022-23 has commenced since October, 2022 and has continued 
till September, 2023 and its data processing work is in progress. The field work of ASUSE 
2023-24 has been initiated in October, 2023.  
 
Annual  Survey  of Service  Sector  Enterprises  (ASSSE)  has been conceived to estimate 
key  characteristics, such as, Gross  Value  Added  (GVA), fixed capital,  Capital  formation, 
number of persons engaged, etc. pertaining to the all-important corporate services sector of 
the  country.  The  survey  also  aims  to  bridge  the  data-gap  of  non-availability  of 
comprehensive  database  of  the  services  sector  of  Indian  economy.  A  list  frame,  using 
GSTN  dataset,  consisting  of  corporate  service  sector  enterprises  has  been  developed  for 
this survey.  
 
Household  Consumption  Expenditure  Survey  (HCES):  Information  collected  in  the 
survey will be primarily used for preparation of weighting diagram through determination 
of  budget  shares  of  different  commodity  groups  in  total  consumption  for  compilation  of 
consumer price indices for rural and urban India. In addition, statistical indicators of level 
of living, social consumption and well-being, and inequalities therein will also be compiled 
from the data collected in the survey. 

HCES 2022-24 has been launched in August, 2022. Field work for the first year of 
the  HCES  2022–24  has  been  completed,  and  the  survey  is  continuing  from  August  2023 
for a period of one year. 

Comprehensive Annual Modular Survey (CAMS): CAMS aims to cater to the need of 
requirements of a number of Ministries simultaneously by focusing on generation of high 
frequency  socio-economic  indicators  combining  the  requirements  of  different  line 
ministries in a number of modules of questions. It has been launched in the 79th round of 
National Sample Survey (NSS) from July, 2022 to June, 2023. 
 
Annual  Survey  of  Industries  (ASI):  Annual  Survey  of  Industries  (ASI)  is  the  principal 
source  of  industrial  statistics  in  India.    The  survey  is  conducted  under  the  statutory 
provisions  of  the  Collection  of  Statistics  (COS)  Act,  2008  (as  amended  in  2017)  and  the 
rules framed there-under in 2011. Results of ASI 2019-20 have been released. Field work 
for ASI 2020-21 and ASI 2021-22 has been completed. The field work of ASI 2022-23 is 
under process. 

 

 

 

12 

Urban Frame Survey (UFS): Urban Frame Survey (UFS) is regularly conducted by Field 
Operations  Division  (FOD)  of  MoSPI  for  formation  and  updation  of  UFS  blocks  for 
providing frame for selection of first stage sampling units in urban sector for use in various 
Socio- Economic Surveys of NSSO. 
 

Note:  Digitization  of  survey  instruments  and  reduction  in  time  lag  in  National 
Sample  Surveys:  In  respect  of  systemic  improvement  and  timely  publication  of  data, 
modern IT tools are being adopted for improved data capturing and processing. As a 
part of this, all the ongoing NSS surveys are now being conducted in CAPI (Computer 
Assisted  Personal  Interview),  loaded  with  in-built  Computer  Scrutiny  Points  (CSP), 
for data validation at different stages of data capturing which is a cloud based digital 
platform  ensuring  simultaneous  data  processing.  It  enables  faster  validation  and 
improved  data  quality  along  with  the  time  cycle  involved  in  publishing  the  survey 
result.  This  technological  improvement  caused  a  drastic  reduction  in  the  time  lag  of 
release of Quarterly Bulletins (QB) of PLFS from nine months to 2-3 months from the 
completion of field work. The time lag in release of PLFS Annual Report 2022-23 has 
also been brought down to around 3 months from 8 months of release of PLFS Annual 
Report 2021-22 from end of survey period. 

OTHER ACTIVITIES OF NSSO, MoSPI 

 

SARVEKSHANA: 
 
Sarvekshana, a biannual  technical Journal of National Sample Survey Office (NSSO) has 
been  an  important  platform  for  encouraging  research  and  analysis  among  academia, 
researchers and officials in the Government, on various socio- economic aspects especially 
based on the surveys conducted as part of the National Sample Survey Office (NSSO). The 
114th issue of NSSO journal ‘Sarvekshana’ has been published in April 2023. The journal 
carried three research papers on various aspects of Official Statistics. A rigorous process of 
review of papers by the Editorial Advisory Board (EAB) and approval by EAB is followed 
for admitting papers for publication. Various issues of ‘Sarvekshana’ are available on the 
website of the Ministry. 
 
NATIONAL SEMINAR: 
 
The Survey Coordination Division  (SCD) of NSSO, MoSPI organizes National  Seminars 
at  regular  intervals,  usually  after  the  release  of  survey  reports  based  on  data  collected 
during  National  Sample  Survey  (NSS)  Rounds,  where  experts/authors  from  different 
disciplines  viz.  Academia  /  Researchers/Central  &  State  Govt.  officers  and  other 
institutions/Universities  are  invited  to  present  research  papers.  Seventeen  (17)  National 
Seminars  have  been  organized  in  reputed  Institutes/Universities  across  the  country  till 
2022-23.  The  17th  National  Seminar  covering  NSS  Survey  Results  taken  up  during  76th 
round (July – December, 2018) and 77th  round (January  – December, 2019) of NSS was 
organized at Cochin University of Science and Technology (CUSAT), Kochi during 1st& 
2nd September, 2022. 
 

 
 

 

13 

The  National  Statistical  Commission  was  constituted  on  12th  July  2006  to  serve  as  a 
nodal and empowered body for all core statistical  activities of the country  and to  evolve, 
monitor and enforce statistical priorities and standards and ensure statistical co-ordination. 
The Commission consists of a part-time Chairman, four part-time Members and Secretary, 
Planning Commission as an ex-officio Member. The Chief Statistician of India (CSI) is the 
Secretary  to  the  Commission.  He  has  a  dual  role,  as  he  is  also  the  Secretary  to  the 
Government  of  India  in  the  Ministry  of  Statistics  and  Programme  Implementation.  The 
Government  of  India  Resolution  dated  19th  December,  2019  gives  the  following  as  the 
functions of the Commission. 

a)  To  identify  the  core  statistics,  which  are  of  national  importance  and  are  critical  to  the 

development of the economy? 

various technical issues; 

b)  To  constitute  professional  committees  or  working  groups  to  assist  the  Commission  on 

c) To evolve national policies and priorities relating to the statistical system; 

d)  To  evolve  standard  statistical  concepts,  definitions,  classifications  and  methodologies  in 

different areas in statistics and lay down national quality standards on core statistics; 

e)  To  evolve  national  strategies  for  the  collection,  tabulation  and  dissemination  of  core 

statistics, including the release calendar for various data sets; 

f)  To  evolve  national  strategies  for  human  resource  development  on  official  statistics 

including information technology and communication needs of the statistical system; 

g) To evolve measures for improving public trust in official statistics; 

h)  To  evolve  measures  for  effective  co-ordination  with  State  Governments  and  Union 

    Administrations  on  statistical  activities  including  strengthening  of  existing  institutional 

i) To exercise statistical co-ordination between Ministries, Departments and other agencies of 

Territory 

mechanisms; 

the 

    Central Government; 

j)  To  exercise  statistical  audit  over  the  statistical  activities  to  ensure  quality  and  integrity  of 

the statistical products; 

k) To recommend to the Central Government, or any State Government, as the case may be, 
measures  to  effectively  implement  the  standards,  strategies  and  other  measures  evolved 
under clauses (c) to (h); 

 

 

 

 

 

14 

l) To advise the Government on the requirement of legislative measures on statistical matters 

including the statute for the National Statistical Commission; 

m) To monitor and review the functioning of the statistical system in the light of the laid down 
policies, standards and methodologies and recommend measures for enhanced performance. 

In  order  to  support  the  Secretary  to  the  Commission  in  providing  assistance  to  the 
Commission  in  the  discharge  of  its  functions,  a  small  secretariat  comprising  of  a  Dy. 
Director General and a 

Director with other support staff has been created. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

15 

Manual- 2 

 

Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation 

Khurshid Lal Bhawan, Janpath Road, 

New Delhi-110001 

Website: - http://mospi.gov.in 
Right to Information Act, 2005 

 

Powers and duties of officers and staff 

COMPUTER CENTRE:  

Sl. No.  Designation  of 

Powers 

Duties 

post 

1. 

Additional 

Director 
General 

Administrative and 
Technical Head of 
Computer Centre 

•  Monitoring of all technical Units. 
•  Administrative  Head  of  Computer 

Centre. 

2. 

Director/Joint 

Functional Head of various 

Director 

Units 

using 

IHSN 

website; 

•  Development  and  maintenance  of 
Data 
MoSPI 
Documentation, 
Archiving  & 
Dissemination  as  per  international 
standard 
toolkit. 
Microdata  of  Census  &  Survey  are 
downloadable 
friendly 
formats  like  SPSS,  SAS,  STATA, 
CSV and delimited text file via web 
application 
login/ 
password.  Facilitates  NIC  Cloud 
Services (Meghraj) for hosting and  

secured  with 

in  user 

•  Maintenance  of  the  applications  / 

portals to divisions of Ministry. 

•  Transformation 

of 

National 
Accounts  data  into  Statistical  Data 
Metadata 
(SDMX) 
format. 

Exchange 

•  Modification  in  CPI  Compilation 
Software  as  and  when  required. 
Maintenance /  Updation  of  Inflation 
and  CPI  numbers  (All  India,  State 
wise,  Rural/Urban/Combined)  on 
CPI Web Portal. 

16 

 

  

 

•  Operation of a Mini Data Centre and 
maintenance of MoSPI’s IT assets – 
The  Servers  of  the  Data  Centre  are 
operating  on  24x7x365  basis  and 
troubleshooting of Network setup. 
Implementing 
the  Cyber  Crisis 
Management  Plan  for  countering 
cyber-attacks  and cyber  terrorism in 
MoSPI  as  per  existing  government 
guidelines. 

• 

•  Support  NSSTA  with  well  qualified 
for 
ISS 

faculties 
for 

IT  courses 

experienced 

and 
conducting 
probationers. 

•  Publishing  of  Compendium  of 

Datasets/ Registries. 

•  To ensure smooth functioning of the 

groups concerned viz.  

i. Operation Unit  

ii. Web Unit  

Data 

Processing 
iii. 
Warehousing and Price Unit  

& 

iv.  Coordination 
Dissemination 

and  Data 

To software development, analyze/ 

process, supervise the data processing 
and imparting trainings on IT related 

subjects. 

17 

3. 

Deputy Director 
  

Assistant 
Director 

Economic Statistics Division (ESD):  

Dr. Pankaj Srivastava, DDG (EC and Coord.) 

Shri Sanjay Kumar, Director (EC)  

 

 

Shri Deepak Kumar, DD 

i.  Coordination  with  CSC,  State/UTs  and  other 

stakeholders on Economic Census related matters. 

1.  Sh. Aditya Singh Hada, 

SSO 

2.  Sh. Vijay Kumar, JSO 
3.  Sh. Vikas Goyal, JSO 
4.  Sh. Virender Pal, JSO 

ii.  Handing  financial,  legal,  and  administrative  matters 

of 7th EC with CSC for 7th EC project closure. 

iii.  Assistance  on  7th  EC  matters  to  the  Fact-Finding 

Team, Contract Monitoring Committee, etc. 

iv. 

Preparation of reply to Audit Paras and queries of the 
Audit Team. 

Preparatory activities for the 8th Economic Census 

v. 
vi.  EC sub-scheme budget-related matters. 
vii.  All other matters pertaining to Economic Census. 

Shri Ved Pal Singh, Director (Coordination) 

Sh. Ashok Kumar Singh, AD 

1.  Shri Sunil Kumar Sahu, 

SSO 

2.  Sh. Johney Tokas, JSO 

i.  Coordination  amongst  various  ESD  Units 

for 
furnishing  consolidated  replies  of  ESD  to  MoSPI 
Divisions.  

ii.  Coordination  and 

replies 

furnishing  ESD 

for 
(Monthly  DO/  Expenditure  Report,  Quarterly 
Progress  Report  (QPR)/  Annual  Progress  report, 
Quarterly  Hindi  report,  E-Samiksha  matter,  RTI/ 
Public Grievances, Draft Cabinet Notes, records- files 
Management, etc. 
 

B.  Syed Iqbal Shuja Naqvi, DDG (IIP, Energy Statistics & Classification) 

Shri 
Chowdhury, JD  

Indradeep 

Roy 

i. 
Energy Statistics  
ii.  National Factsheet 

i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 

Index of Industrial Production 
Index of Service Production 
Statistical Classification (NIC, NPCMS, NPCSS) 
ICT Sector Statistics 

Sh. Vivek Kumar Gaur, SSO 

Shri Pramod Ram, JSO 

Shri Deepak Dhanawat, JD 

Ms. Alisha Khan, DD  

Ms. Vasumana Punj, AD 

1.  Shri Aproop 

Bhattacharya, SSO 

2.  Sh. Neeraj Diwedi, SSO 
3.  Sh. Haider Ali, JSO 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

18 

Policy Implementation and Monitoring Division (PIMD): 

Designation of Post 

Powers 

Duties 

Sl. 
No  
1. 

 

ADG 

Technical Head 
of the Division. 

Release of the various official 

statistical reports, advisory functions to 

different ministry and states and 

various National/International agencies. 

DDG 

Overall 

Release of the various official 

monitoring of the 

statistical reports, advisory functions to 

functional 

different ministry and states and 

requirements of 

various National/International agencies 

Joint Director 

Functional Head 

To ensure smooth functioning of the 

the Division. 

of the various 

Groups. 

groups concerned. 

To analyse/ process and supervise the 

data and information. 

To analyse/process initial level data 

To analyse/process initial level data 

and information. 

and information. 

Deputy Director/s 

SSO/s 

JSOs 

Price Statistics Division (PSD): 

S. No. Designation 

Powers 

Duties 

1 

Additional Director 

Technical Head of 

Release of the Consumer Price Index and 

General 

Price Statistics 

related work, Participation in ICP and 

Division 

Advisory functions to different Ministry 

2 

Deputy Director 

Deputy Technical 

Release of the Consumer Price Index and 

General 

Head of Price 

related work, Participation in ICP and 

Statistics Division 

Advisory functions to different Ministry 

and States. 

and States. 

Directors/Joint 

Functional Head of 

To ensure smooth functioning of the 

Directors 

Division. 

working of the Division. 

Dy. Directors/ Asstt. 

Directors 

Statistical Officers 

(SSOs & JSOs) 

To analyses/process and supervise the 

data and information. 

To analyses/process initial level data and 

information. 

 

 

 

 

 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

 

 

3 

4 

5 

  

 

19 

Infrastructure and Project Monitoring Division (IPMD): 

1.  

Dy. Adviser/ Dy. 

Director/ U. Secretary/ 

Section Officer 

2. 

. Asstt. Director/ Stat. 

 

 

Officer/ Economic 
Officer/ Asstt./ Sr. 

Statistical Officer/Jr. 

Statistical Officer 

To analyse/ process & supervise the 

compilation of various reports and settle 

the audit paras of CAG reports. 

To analyse/ process initial level data 

and information, upload information on 
computers and generation of requisite 

reports. 

Member of Parliament Local Area Development Division (MPLADS): 

Sl.No. 

Designation 

Powers  

Duties 

1.  Additional Secretary 

Head of the 

To ensure smooth functioning of the 

Division 

Division 

2. 

3. 

4. 

DDG 

Functional Head of 

To ensure smooth functioning of the 

the Division 

Division 

Director/ Joint 

Director/ Deputy 

Functional in-
charge of the 

Release of authorization of funds in respect 
of Hon’ble MPs, monitoring the MPLAD 

Secretary 

Division 

scheme. 

Under 

Secretary/Deputy 

Functional in-
charge of the 

To analyse/process to release of funds, 
implementation of the scheme, guide/ 

Director 

Division 

advice the state authorities/ stakeholders 

 

 

 

 
 

NATIONAL STATISTICAL COMMISSION (NSC): 

1. 

Secretary, NSC 

Technical and 

To assist the Commission in its 

2. 

DDG (NSC) 

Administrative Head 

of the NSC Sectt. 

In-charge of the 
Technical and 

Administrative work 

of the NSC Sectt. 

work 

All matters relating to 
formation of the 
Commission. 

To assist the Secretary of the 
Commission in the work of the 
Commission. 

To prepare agenda papers and 
arrange for the Commission’s 

 

 

 

 

20 

meetings. 

To make correspondence on 
behalf of the Commission. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

3. 

Director (NSC) 

In-charge of the 
Technical and 

Administrative staff 

of the NSC Sectt. 

4. 

Statistical 
Officers 

 

To  run  the  Sectt.  of  the  NSC 
efficiently,  assist  in  preparing 
technical 
the 
Commission  and  look  after  the 
requirements of the Chairman and 
Members of the NSC Sectt. 

papers 

for 

To assist the DDG and Director in 
their work 

•  The  Commission  has  the  requisite  autonomy  to  discharge  its  functions  effectively  and 

efficiently. In particular, the Commission has the powers to: - 

require production of any document which in the opinion of the Commission will serve or 
may serve statistical purposes; 

require  statistical  agencies  and  institutions  to  provide  details  of  statistical  activities, 
including  concepts  and  definitions  used,  methodologies  followed,  quality  standards 
adopted, sampling and non-sampling errors, etc. in respect of core statistics; 

require attendance of any person including any public servant on matters connected with 
core statistics; and 

issuing  notices  for  examination  of  witnesses  and  documents  or  any  matters  connected 
with core statistics. 

•  The powers mentioned above would be collectively exercised by the Chairman/ Members 

of the Commission. 

Intra, Inter and International Coordination Unit (IIICU): 
 

Sl. 

Designation of Post 

Powers 

Duties 

No. 

1. 

ADG (IIICU) 

Head of IIIC Unit of 

MoSPI 

ADG(IIICU) is responsible for 
coordination work relating to 

divisions of erstwhile CSO only as 
per the Indian Statistical Service 
Rules, 2016 notified on June 7, 

2016. 

21 

• 

• 

• 

• 

 

 

2. 

DDG (IIICU) 

Second in-charge of 

(i) Coordination in the MoSPI, with 

IIICU 

Central Ministries/ Departments 
and International Organizations. 

(ii) Work related to administration 

of ISI (reporting to AS, MoSPI) 

Directors/Joint 

Functional  Heads

Various activities are assigned to 

Directors 

 
of 
various activities 

these officers as per the work 

allocation. 

- 

Provide technical support in various 

activities of IIICU. 

Deputy 

Directors/Asst. 

Directors/Statist ical 

Officers 

Statistical Strengthening Project Unit (SSPU): 
 

S.No.  Designation of 

Powers 

Duties 

Post 

ADG (IIICU) 

Head of the SSP 

ADG (SSPU) is responsible for 

Unit of the MOS&PI 

functions of Coordination & Planning, 
Support for Statistical Strengthening 
(SSS) sub scheme, Output-Outcome 
Monitoring Framework (OOMF) of 

Capacity Development (CD) scheme of 

MoSPI, etc. 

Strengthening (SSS) sub scheme of 
MOS&PI, OOMF of CD scheme of 

MOS&PI, Internal Quality Assessment 

Framework (IQAF), etc. 

Various activities are assigned to these 
officers as per the mandate of SSPU. 

DDG (SSPU) 

Second in-charge of 

Works related to Support for Statistical 

SSPU 

Directors / Joint 

Functional Heads of 

various activities 

Directors 
(SSPU) 

Deputy Director 

/ Statistical 

Officers 

- 

Assistance in the various activities of 

SSPU 

National Statistical Systems Training Academy (NSSTA) 

Sr. No. 

Designation 

Powers 

Duties 

Additional Director General 

Divisional Head 

Deputy Director General 

Administrative Head 
of NSSTA. Head of 

To look after the 

overall functioning 

To ensure smooth 
functioning of the 

Division 

4. 

5. 

 

1 

2 

3 

4 

1 

2 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

22 

the Department 

of the Academy. 

3 

Director/ Joint Director 

Functional Head of 
the various Sections/ 

Groups. 

4 

5 

Deputy Director/ Assistant 

Director 

Senior Statistical Officer/ Junior 

Statistical Officer 

 

 

Training as well as 

administration. 

To ensure 

organizing training 

programmes as 
course director. 

To organize various 

training 

programmes as 

course coordinator. 

and to supervise 

day-to-day general 

administration, 
accounts and 
coordination 

matters. 

To coordinate for 
organizing training 
programmes and to 
deal with other day-

to-day general 

administration work 

as dealing hand. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

23 

Manual- 3 

Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation 

Khurshid Lal Bhawan, Janpath Road 

New Delhi-110001 

Website: - http://mospi.gov.in 
Right to Information Act, 2005 

Channel of supervision and level of disposal of cases: 

i) Computer Centre: 

Assistant  Director/  Deputy  Director/  Joint  Director/  Director/  Additional  Director 

General/Director General / Secretary. 

ii) National Accounts Division (NAD):  

Junior Statistical Officer/ Senior Statistical Officer 

Assistant Director/ Deputy Director 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Joint Director/Director 

Deputy Director General 

Additional Director General 

Director General 

Secretary 

iii) Policy Implementation Monitoring Division (PIMD): 

•  Statistical  Officers  →Deputy  Director  →  Deputy  Director  General  →Additional 

•  Deputy  Director  General  →Additional  Director  General  →  Director  General 

Director               General 

→Secretary. 

iv) Price Statistical Division (PSD): 

National  Statistics  Office  (NSO):  Assistant  Director/  Deputy  Director/  Joint  Director/ 
Director/ Deputy Director General/ Additional Director General/ Director General/ Secretary. 

  

 

 

 

  

 

24 

v) Subordinate Statistical Services Division (SSS): 

1.  Statistical  Officers  /  Deputy  Director  /  Director  or  Deputy  Secretary  /  Joint  Secretary 

(Admin) / Director General / Secretary. 
 

(Admin) / Director General. 

2.  Statistical  Officers  /  Deputy  Director  /  Director  or  Deputy  Secretary  /  Joint  Secretary 

3.  Statistical  Officers  /  Deputy  Director  /  Director  or  Deputy  Secretary  /  Joint  Secretary 

(Admin). 
 

4.  Statistical Officers / Deputy Director / Director or Deputy Secretary. 

5.  Statistical Officers / Deputy Director. 

vi) Programme Implementation Wing 

•  Infrastructure and Project Monitoring Division (IPMD): Jr. Statistical Officer, Sr. 
Statistical Officer, Section Officer/ Under Secretary/ Deputy Director/ Joint Director/ 
Dy. Director General / Additional Secretary/Secretary. 

•  Member of Parliament Local Area Development Scheme (MPLADS): 

1.  Deputy Director/ Under Secretary 
2.  Deputy Secretary/ Director 
3.  DDG  
4.  Additional Secretary 
5.  Secretary   

vii) National Statistical Commission (NSC): 

In the Secretariat of the Commission, the channels of supervision and accountability are given 
below: 

JSO/ Deputy Director/ Director/ Deputy Director General/ Secretary. 

viii) National Statistical Systems Training Academy (NSSTA) 

Sl. 
No. 

1 

Category of 

Subject 
General 

Channel of Submission 

Level of final Disposal 

JSO/SSO→DD & HO→DDG 

HOD 

25 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Administration/ 
Accounts matters 

Procurement/ 
Maintenance 

Matters 

CPWD Matters 

RTI Matters 

Parliamentary 

Matters 

Training Related 

Matters 

Matters Related 
to Coordination 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

JSO/SSO→DD & HO→DDG 

DDG & HOD/ DG/ 

Secretary 

JSO/SSO→DD & HO→DDG 

JSO/SSO→DD & HO→DDG 

JSO/SSO→ DD→ Director→ 

DDG→ADG→DG 

HOD 

HOD 

DG 

JSO/SSO→DD→JD/Director→ 
DDG→ADG→IFD/DG/Secretary 

ADG/DG/Secretary 

JSO/SSO→DD→HOD/Director→ 

DDG→ADG 

ADG 

 

26 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Manual- 4 

Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation 

Khurshid Lal Bhawan, Janpath Road, 

New Delhi-110001 

Website-http://mospi.gov.in 

Right to Information Act, 2005 

 

The norms set by the Ministry for the discharge of its functions 

i) Economic Statistical Division (ESD): 

Activity 

Norms 

Remarks 

National Industrial Classification 

 

Need based 

National Product Classification – 

Need based 

3. 

National Product Classification – 

Need based 

Services Sector 

Manufacturing Sector 

4. 

Energy Statistics 

 

Every Year 

5.  Release of All India Index of Industrial 

Every month 

It is available on the 

Production  

website at; 

https://www.mospi.gov.in 

ii) National Account Division (NAD): 

Activity 

Norms 

Remarks 

Release of National Accounts 

Estimates. 

Discussion with State Govts. On SDP 

estimates. 

As per advance 

release 
calendar. 

Every year 

Payroll Reporting in India: An 

Employment Perspective - September, 

Every Month 

2019 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

S. 
No. 

 

1. 

2. 

S. 
No. 

1 

2 

3 

 

 

 

 

27 

iii) Policy Implementation and Monitoring Division (PIMD): 

Sl. 
No.  
1. 

2. 

Activity 

Norms 

Remarks 
 

Data Governance Quality Index 

(DGQI) Score 

Every 
Quarter 

Available on DGQI Portal and 
progress updated on Ministry’s 

Every Year 

A document Data Dissemination: 

Social Media Platform 

Compliance of National 
Metadata Structure for 

Statistical Products 

3. 

Administrative Data Ecosystem 

 

National Metadata Structure 

(NMDS) For 

Statistical Products and Product-
wise Compliance of Metadata are 

available on website. 
A Discussion Paper 

Administrative Data: Issues, 

Concerns & Prospects an Indian 

Perspective is available on 

website. 

Prepared a directory on 

administrative statistics being 

released by various administrative 

Ministries/ Departments on 

various sectors. 

Committee constituted on the 

directions of the National 

Statistical Commission (NSC) 
studied two sectors, viz., health 

and education to identify possible 
areas to reduce the survey burden 
by examining various aspects of 

administrative data. 

 

 

 

Prepared a directory on the basis 
of Statutory Returns being filed by 

various agencies under 

Government of India to identify 
possible usages of it as official 

statistics. 

S. 
No.  

1 

 

 

iv) Price Statistics Division (PSD): 

Activity 

Norms 

Remarks 

Release of All India Consumer 
Price Index - Rural, Urban and 

Every Month  The time of release of CPI data is 
fixed for 12th of every month (or 

28 

Combined 

next working day if 12th is a 
holiday). 

  

S. 
No. 

1 

v) Subordinate Statistical Services (SSS): 

Activity 

Norms 

Remarks 

Probationer/Induction Training 
Programme. 

Every year 

Subject to induction. 

2. 

Recruitment 

Every year 

5.  MACP 

Half yearly 

- 

3. 

Promotion 

4. 

Confirmation 

6. 

56(J) 

7. 

Transfer & Posting 

8.  Other Misc. Work. 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

Every year 

On Need 
Basis 

Quarterly 

On Need 
Basis 

On Need 
Basis 

vi) Programme Implementation Wing:  

Infrastructure and Project Monitoring Division (IPMD:   

Activity 

Norms 

Remarks 

 Release of Review Report on 
Infrastructure performance 
Release of Flash Report on Central 
Sector Projects costing Rs. 150 crore 
and above. 
Release of Quarterly Project 
Implementation Status Report on 
Central Sector Projects costing Rs.150 
crore and above 

Every month 

Available on website 

Every month 

Available on website 

Every month 

Available on website 

Member of Parliament Local Area Development Scheme (MPLADS): 

Sl. 

Activity 

Norms 

Remarks 

Sl. 
No. 
1. 

2. 

3. 

 

 

 

29 

No. 

1.  Issue  of  Authorization  of  MPLAD  funds  in 

Available on website  

respect of Hon’ble MPs  

Day by 
day work  

vii) National Statistical Commission (NSC): 

The  National  Statistical  Commission  has  not  set  any  specific  norms  for  the  discharge  of  its 
functions.  However,  the  recommendations  made  by  the  Commission  as  and  when  made  are 
forwarded by its Secretariat to the concerned Government Departments. 

The  recommendations  made  by  the  Commission  during  a  financial  year  are  reported  in  the 
Annual Report of the Commission for that year. In accordance with the instructions contained 
in the Government of India Notification No. 85 dated 1st June 2005 published in the Gazette 
of  India,  Extraordinary,  Part-III-Section  4,  setting  out  the  details  of  appointment  of  the 
National  Statistical  Commission,  the  Commission  has  to  furnish  its  Annual  Report  for  each 
financial year. The relevant extract of the Notification is given below: 

"12. The Commission shall prepare, for each financial year, its Annual Report, giving a full 
account  of  its  activities  during  the  financial  year  and  forward  the  same  to  the  Central 
Government. The Central Government shall cause to be laid the Annual Report together with 
a memorandum of  action taken on the recommendations therein, along with the reasons for 
the non-acceptance, if any, of any of such recommendations before each House of Parliament. 
Where  any  recommendation  or  any  part  thereof  concerns  any  State  Government,  the 
Commission  shall  forward  a  copy  of  such  recommendation  or  part  thereof  to  such  State 
Governments which shall cause it to be laid before the Legislature of the State along with a 
memorandum  explaining  the  action  taken  on  the  recommendations  relating  to  the  State  and 
reasons for the non-acceptance, if any, of any of such recommendations." 

 

‘The Commission submitted its Annual Reports to the Government of India in the Ministry of 
Statistics  and  Programme  Implementation  and  the  year  wise  tabling  of  these  Reports  along 
with Action taken report (ATR) in the Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha is as under:  

S. 

No. 

Annual Report & 
ATR for the year 

Tabled 
Sabha on 

in  Lok 

Remarks 

in 
Tabled 
Rajya  Sabha 
on 

1 

2006-07 

05-12-2007 

06-12-2007 

tabled. 
ATR  was  not 
Recommendations  made  in 
this report were included in 
the report of 2007-08. 

 

 

 

30 

2 

2007-08 

27-07-2009 

29-07-2009 

ATR  tabled  included  the 
ATR  on  recommendations 
made 
the  Report  of 
in 
2006-07. 

2008-09 

16-12-2009 

14-12-2009 

2009-10 

04-08-2011 

05-08-2011 

2010-11 

21-05-2012 

22-05-2012 

2011-12 

02-08-2017 

03-08-2017 

2012-13 

02-08-2017 

03-08-2017 

2013-14 

02-08-2017 

03-08-2017 

2014-15 

02-08-2017 

03-08-2017 

2015-16 

02-08-2017 

03-08-2017 

2016-17 

14-03-2018 

15-03-2018 

2017-18 

02-01-2019 

04-01-2018 

2018-19 

16-09-2020 

17-09-2020 

2019-20 

10-02-2021 

11-02-2021 

2020-21 

20-12-2021 

21-12-2021 

2021-22 

19-12-2022 

20-12-2022 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

viii) National Statistical Systems Training Academy (NSSTA) 

Activity 

Sr. 
No. 

Norms 

Remarks 

Probationer/ Induction Training 
Programme. 

Refresher Training Courses for in-
Service Statistical Officers/ Officials. 

Every Year 

Subject to induction 

Every year 

As per guidelines 

Demand-based training for line 
ministries, States/UTs, etc. 

As and when 
demand received 

 

 

 

 

31 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

10 

11 

12 

13 

14 

15 

16 

1 

2 

3 

 

 

 

Manual- 5 

Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation 

Khurshid Lal Bhawan, Janpath Road 

New Delhi-110001 

Website:-http://mospi.gov.in 

Right to Information Act, 2005 

List of rules, regulations, instructions, manuals and records for discharging functions available 

with the public authority for the smooth discharge of its functions 

 

 

National Statistical Commission (NSC): 

The  Commission  discharges  its  functions  in  accordance  with  the  mandate  given  in  the 
following notifications issued by the Government of India. 

•  Government  of  India  Notification  No.  478  dated  19th  December  2019  published  in  the 
Gazette  of  India,  Extraordinary,  Part-III-Section  4.  (Government  of  India  Notification  No. 
85  dated  1st  June  2005  published  in  the  Gazette  of  India,  Extraordinary,  Part-III-Section  4 
was amended in 2019) 

• Government of India Notification No. 465 dated 10th May 2006 published in the Gazette of 
India, 

Extraordinary, Part-II-Section 3- Sub-Section (ii). 

The  Rules,  regulations  etc.,  as  are  applicable  to  Central  Government  employees  are 
applicable to the employees in the Secretariat to the Commission. 

Indian Statistical Services (ISS): 

ISS Rules, Civil List, Seniority List (already available in official website of M/o Statistics & 
PI) & rules and guidelines issued by Govt of India time to time. 

Policy Implementation Monitoring Division (PIMD): 

General  instructions/guidelines  issued  by  the  various  Central  Ministries  like  Ministry  of 
Finance,  Personnel,  Parliamentary  Affairs  etc.  from  time  to  time  are  being  followed  by  the 
Ministry  of  Statistics  and  Programme  Implementation  in  cases  relating  to  Personnel  matter, 
Procurement of jobs, services, etc. and other financial matters. 

32 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Subordinate Statistical Services (SSS): 

General instructions/guidelines issued by the Govt. of India from time to time. 

Member of Parliament Local Area Divisional Scheme Division (MPLADS): 

Refer website mplads.gov.in. 

National Statistical Systems Training Academy (NSSTA) 

•  Minutes of the Training Programme Approval Committee (TPAC). 
•  General  instructions/guidelines  issued  by  the  various  Central  Ministries  like  Ministry  of 
Finance, Personnel, Parliamentary Affairs etc. from time to time are being followed by the 
Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation in cases relating to Personnel matter, 
Procurement of jobs, services, etc. and other financial matters. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

33 

Manual- 6 

Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation 

Khurshid Lal Bhawan, Janpath Road 

New Delhi-110001 

Website:-http://mospi.gov.in 

Right to Information Act, 2005 

 

Statement in respect of the categories of documents held by Computer Centre 

Computer Centre: 

• Unit  level  datasets  of  Socio-economic  surveys,  National  Sample  Survey  (38th  round  to 
78th), Annual Survey of Industries (1974-75 to ASI 2019-20), Economic Census (3rd to 6th) 
, Periodic Labour Force Survey data(PLFS  2017-18 to PLF 2022-23 ), IIP, Time use survey 
are  being  disseminated  freely  online  to  the  users  in  user-friendly  format  with  proper 
documentation after registration. 

• Quarterly estimates of GDP at current and constant prices (viz. 2011-12 prices) upto Q1 of 

2022-23 have been converted into SDMX and disseminated through the Ministry’s website. 

• Monthly Consumer Price Index (CPI) data has been converted in SDMX and is available to 

download from Ministry’s website for the period April 2023 to August 2023. 

Economic Statistics Division (ESD): 

• Instructions  of  Manual  of  Economic  Census  (EC)  –  2005  (Procedure  to  be  followed  for 
filling  of  EC,  2005  schedules),  Schedules  of  EC,  2005  (Items  covered  under  EC  2005), 
Report on EC, 2005, (Analysis of EC 2005 data),The revised the information of 6th  EC and 
on 
7th  EC 
(https://www.mospi.gov.in/all-india-report-sixth-economic-census) 
& 
(https://www.mospi.gov.in/7th-economic-census) respectively. 

same  may 

documents 

accessed 

related 

and 

the 

for 

be 

• All  India  Index  of  Industrial  Production  with  Base  year  1993-94,  2004-05  and  2011-12 
(Time  series  data  on  Index  of  Industrial  Production),  Energy  Statistics  (Statistics  of 
production  and  consumption  of  the  different  energy  sources  viz,  coal,  crude  petroleum, 
natural  gas  and  electricity),  National  Industrial  Classification,  2008  (NIC,  2008)  (Contains 
codes  for  coding  of  economic  activities  of  the  available  data  through  different  means  like 
surveys etc, and for presentation of data), National Product Classification  – Manufacturing 
Sector,  2011  (NPCMS,  2011),  National  Product  Classification  –  Services  Sector,  2010 
(NPCSS,  2010)  (Contains  codes  for  coding  of  economic  goods/  services  of  the  available 
data through different means like surveys etc, and for presentation of data). 

  

 

 

 

34 

National accounts Division (NAD):  

National Accounts Statistics (2023), Supply Use Table (2011-12 to 2019-20), Back-Series of 

National  Accounts  (Base  2011-12,  1950-51  to  2011-12),  National  Accounts  Statistics- 

Sources  and  Methods  (1980,  1989,  2007  and  2012),  Changes  in  Methodology  and  Data 

Sources  in  the  New  Series  of  National  Accounts  Base  Year  2011-12,  State  wise  and 

Economic  activity  wise  estimates  of  GVA/GSDP,  NVA/NSDP  and  per  capita  income  at 

current  and  constant  price  (base  2011-12)for  the  year  2011-12  to  2018-19,  State-wise  and 

crop-wise  Estimates  of  value  of  output  from  Agriculture  (1960-61  to  1970-71,  1970-71  to 

1980-81, 1980-81 to 1990-91), State-wise Estimates of value of output from Agriculture and 

Livestock (1990-91 to 2002-03), State-wise Estimates of value of output from Agriculture and 

Allied  Activities  (1999-2000  to  2005-06),  State-wise  Estimates  of  value  of  output  from 

Agriculture  and  Allied  Activities  (2004-05  to  2012-13),  State-wise  and  Item-Wise  value  of 

Output  from  Agriculture,  Forestry  and  Fishing  (2011-12  to  2020-21),  Annual  and  Quarterly 

estimates of GDP at current and constant prices, 2011-12 series, Report of the Sub Committee 

on  Unorganised  Manufacturing  &  Services  Sectors  for  Compilation  of  National  Accounts 

Statistics  with  Base  Year  2011-12,  Report  of  the  Sub-Committee  On  System  of  Indian 

National  Accounts,  Report  of  the  Sub-Committee  on  Agriculture  And  Allied  Sectors,  Final 

Report  of  the  Sub-Committee  on  Private  Corporate  Sector  including  PPPs,  Report  of  the 

Committee on Private Final Consumption Expenditure, Methodology for Compilation of  the 

Gross State Value Added (GSVA) in the New Base (2011-12), Press Note issued By Division. 

Policy Implementation Monitoring Division (PIMD): 

•  National Metadata Structure (NMDS) For Statistical Products. 
•  A  directory  on  administrative  statistics  being  released  by  various  administrative 

Ministries/ Departments on various sectors. 

•  A  directory  on  the  basis  of  Statutory  Returns  being  filed  by  various  agencies  under 

Government of India to identify possible usages of it as official statistics. 

Price Statistics Division (PSD): 

Statement in respect of the categories of documents held by this Division 

1.  Current  Series  (Base  2012=100)-  available  from  January,  2013  onward  and  Back  Series 
(Base  2012=100)-  available  from  January,  2011  up-to  May,  2013,  the  details  of  the 
type of Indices are given below: 

a.     Time series of Consumer Price Indices - 

•  Monthly  All  India  Indices  and  Inflation  rates  (in  percentage)  of  Rural,  Urban  and 

Combined sectors at Group and Subgroup level 

 

 

35 

•  State wise Group Indices and Inflation rates (in percentage) of Rural, Urban and Combined 
sectors for all the states/UTs and Subgroup level Indices and inflation rates (in percentage) 
of major 22 states of India 

b.  All India Item level Indices and Inflation rates (In percentage) of the Combined sector. 

2.  Old  Series  (Base  2010=100)-  available  from  January,  2011  up-to  December,  2014,  the 

details of the type of Indices are given below: 

a.  Time series of Consumer Price Indices - 

•  Monthly  All  India  Indices  and  Inflation  rates  (in  percentage)  of  Rural,  Urban  and 

Combined sectors at Group and Subgroup level. 

•  State  wise  Group  Indices  and  Inflation  rates  (in  percentage)  of  Rural,  Urban  and 
Combined sectors for all the states/UTs and Subgroup level Indices and inflation rates 
(in percentage) of major 22 states of India. 

b.  All India Item level Indices and Inflation rates (In percentage) of the Combined sector  

Technical Reports: 

(TAC on SPCL) 

1.  Report  of  Technical  Advisory  Committee  on  Statistics  of  Prices  &  Cost  of  Living 

2.  Document on Changes in Revised series (Base 2010=100 to 2012=100) 

These documents are placed on the website of the Ministry also for public access. 

Subordinate Statistical Services Division (SSS): 

SSS Civil  List,  Immoveable Property Returns of SSS officers, APARs of SSS officers, SSS 
Govt. Notifications, Seniority Lists of JSOs and SSOs, Rosters, Database, Records related to 
Court Cases, Records related to recruitment and Other Miscellaneous Documents etc. 

Infrastructure Project Monitoring Division (IPMD):  

•  Monthly review Reports on Infrastructure Performance in 11 key sectors.  
•   Monthly  Flash  Report  (Latest  status  of  central  sector  projects  costing  Rs.150  crore  and 

above).  

•   Quarterly  Report  on  all  projects  costing  Rs.  150  crore  and  above  (Latest  status  of  all 

categories of cases of mega and major).  

Member of Parliament Local Area Development Scheme (MPLADS): 

  

 

 

 

 

36 

Member  of  Parliament  Local  Area  Development  Scheme  (MPLADS):  Monthly  Statement  of 
release and expenditure of Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha MPs under MPLADS (State-wise/MP-
wise details  of release of funds/amount sanctioned/expenditure incurred  and unspent  balance). 
Monitoring of implementation & Progress of scheme; Release of Annual Reports. 

Statistical Strengthening Project Unit (SSPU): 

Works related to implementation & monitoring of SSS sub scheme of MoSPI, OOMF of CD   
scheme of MoSPI, IQAF, etc. 

National Statistical Systems Training Academy (NSSTA) 

•  Service Books and Personal files of employees. 
•  Records related to general administration. 
•  Training related database. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

37 

Manual- 7 

Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation 

Khurshid Lal Bhawan, Janpath Road 

New Delhi-110001 

Website: - http://mospi.gov.in 
Right to Information Act, 2005 

 
 

Particulars of any arrangement that exists for consultation with or representation by the 

members of the public in relation to the formulation of its policy of implementation 

Policy Implementation Monitoring Division (PIMD): 

National  Metadata  Structure  (NMDS)  is  developed  by  PIMD  to  provide  guidelines  for  the 
data  producer  to  adhere  to  a  basic  minimum  quality  standard  in  order  to  establish  and 
maintain  the  quality  of  data  and  enhance  ease  in  sharing  data.  The  document  Data 
Dissemination:  National  Metadata  Structure  (NMDS)  For  Statistical  Products  is 
available  on  the  https://mospi.gov.in/mospi-innovation-and-dialogue.  This  division  has 
arrangement for consultation with, or representation by, the members of the public, in general. 
The  person  concerned/stakeholders  may  contact 
the  official  of  PIMD  at  Policy 
Implementation  &  Monitoring  Division,  Room  No.  610,  6th  Floor,  Khurshid  Lal 
Bhawan, Janpath, New Delhi – 110001. The working hours for visit are from 09.00 A.M. to 
5.30 P.M. (Monday to Friday). 

Member of Parliament Local Area Development Scheme (MPLADS): 

Under  the  Member  of  Parliament  Local  Area  Development  Scheme  (MPLADS),  the 
following two Committees viz.,  

i.  MPLADS Committee (Lok Sabha) The Committee meets as and when required.  
ii.  MPLADS Committee (Rajya Sabha) The Committee meets as and when required. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

38 

Manual- 8 

Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation 

Khurshid Lal Bhawan, Janpath Road 

New Delhi-110001 

Website: - http:// mospi.gov.in 
Right to Information Act, 2005 

 
 

A statement of the boards, councils, committees and other bodies consisting of two or more 
persons constituted as its part or for the purpose of its advice, and as to whether meetings of 
those boards, councils, committees and other bodies are open to the public, or the minutes of 

such meetings are accessible for public 

 
Details of Committees/Working Group of NSSO 
 
Sl 
No. 

Member 
Secretary 

Name of Committee 

Chairman 

Date of Constitution & 

tenure 

1 

Working Group for the 79th 

SDRD 

Sh. Pravin Srivastava, 

Date of constitution: 26.03.2021 

Round of NSS 

Former CSI-cum-Secretary 

(S&PI), MoSPI 

2 

Standing Committee on 

SDRD 

Dr. Pronab Sen, Program 

Date of Constitution: 13.07.2023 

Statistics (SCoS) 

Director, India Team 

Researcher, International 
Growth Centre, New Delhi 

Editorial Advisory Board 
(EAB) for Sarvekshana 

Director, SCD 

Dr. G. C. Manna 

Monitoring Committee, 

North Eastern States 
Prohibition of sexual 

Harassment of Women in 

workplace 

FOD 

FOD 

Zonal Head, Guwahati 

DDG, NSO, FOD Hqrs. 

Delhi 

 

 

tenure: From 26.03.2021 till the 
completion of all the activities as 

per the TOR 

Tenure: The tenure of the 

Chairman and Members (both 

Official and non-official) will be 

for a period of two years. The 
Committee will be reviewed 

The tenure of the EAB was of 

five year from date of issuing the 

periodically. 
04.04.2019 

order 

01/08/2007 

Initially with 4 members on 
17.07.2007. Thereafter, the 

committee has been 

reconstituted on 14.07.2009, 

21.08.2012, 19.03.2014, 
04.04.2014, 08.04.2015, 
29.07.2016, 04.01.2017, 
13.07.2017, 21.02.2018, 
19.08.2019 & 18.08.2020 

respectively. 

39 

3 

4 

5 

 

National Accounts Division (NAD) 

S. 
No 

Name & 
address 

Main 

functions of 

of the body 

the body 

Constitution 
of the body 

Date of 

last 

constitutio

n 

Date 
upto 
which 
valid 

Whether 
meetings 

open 

to 

Whether 
minutes 
accessible 

to 

public 

public 

Frequ
ency 

of 

meeti
ngs 

Re 
m 

arks 

Finance, 

21.06.2016 

No 

No 

29.07.2019 

No 

No 

The tenure 

of this 

committee 
will be five 
years or till 

the 

completion 
of next base 

year 

revision of 
National 
Accounts, 
whichever 

is later. 

Within 6 
Months of 

its first 
meeting 

 

Tenure of 

the 

Committee 
is extended 
for a period 
of one-year 
w.e.f 25th 
June, 2019 

26.06.2018 

No 

No 

Need 
based 

1 

Advisory 

Committee on 

National 
Accounts 
Statistics 

Expert Group 

on 

2 

contribution of 
Knowledge in 

GDP 

Committee for 
Sub-National 

Accounts 

3 

 

Eminent 

academician, 
representatives 

from RBI, 
Ministry of 

Ministry of 
Agriculture, 
NITI Aayog, 

State 

Governments 

Eminent 

academician, 
representatives 

from NITI 

Aayog, 

Eminent 

academician, 
representatives 

from RBI, 

State 

Governments 

Offer advice 

on the 

methodology 

used for 

compiling the 

national 
accounts 
statistics 

To suggest 
appropriate 

sources/ 
studies/ 

surveys to fill 
the data gaps 

To review the 

concepts, 
definitions, 

classifications, 

data 

conventions, 
data sources 

and data 

requirements 
for preparation 

of State 
Domestic 

Product (SDP) 

and District 
Domestic 

Product (DDP) 

and to lay 

down revised 

guidelines 

4 

 

Expert Group 
on Estimation 
of Savings and 

Investment 

The Group 
will oversee 

the entire 
gamut of 

Eminent 

academician, 
representatives 

from RBI, 

The tenure 

of the 

Committee 

is from 

19.08.2019 

No 

No 

Need 
based 

Need 
based 

Need 
based 

 

 

 

 

40 

through 

Household 

Survey 

 

activities 

Ministry of 

relating to the 

pilot study. 

Finance, 
NSSO 

 

19.08.2019 

to June, 
2020. 

 

 Policy Implementation Monitoring Division (PIMD) 

(*However, the following mentioned boards, councils, committees and other bodies are not constituted by PIMD but it is one 
of the members of these boards, councils, committees and other bodies) 

S.No

Name & 

Main function of 

Constitutio

Date of 

Frequen

Remarks 

. 

Address of 
the body 

the body 

n of the 

body 

Date up 
to which 

constitu

valid 

last 

tion 

Whether 
minutes 
accessible 

to 

public 

cy 
of 

 

meeting 

1.  Technical 
Working 
Group 
on 
Commitment 
to 
Equity 
(CEQ) 

11th 
July, 
2023 

Continuo
us till 
reconstit
uted 
 

No  

Need 
based 

- 

Whet
her 
meeti
ngs 
open 

to 
publi

c 
No 

 

 

of 

and 

analyze 

To 
the 
impacts  of  the  fiscal 
social 
policy 
transfers 
the 
Government of India 
in 
on 
the 
India 
to 
Commitment 
Equity 
(CEQ) 
Approach. 

inequality 

using 

identify 

To 
the 
relevant  data  owners 
and  securing  data 
sharing  agreements 
for  necessary  inputs 
under 
the  CEQ 
Framework. 

validate 

the 
To 
and 
accuracy 
completeness 
of 
underlying  data  and 
inputs  required  for 
conducting  a  high-
quality 
CEQ 
Approach. 

Ensure 
the  correct 
interpretations 
of 
inputs  and  leverage 
the result and lessons 
learned  in  practical 
equity-improving 
policy actions. 

Under 
the 
chairmanshi
p  of  Chief 
Economic 
Advisor, 
including 
D/o 
Economic 
Affairs, 
Cabinet 
Secretariat, 
D/o 
Expenditure
Central 
, 
Board 
of 
Direct 
taxes, 
Central 
Board 
Indirect 
Taxes,  D/o 
Revenue, 
MoSPI, 
M/o  Labour 
& 
Employmen
t, 
M/o 
Education, 
MoH&FW, 
M/o  Rural 
Developme
nt,  MoHUA 
and 
other 
distinguishe
d  experts  as 
members 

of 

2.  Data 

To  enable 

review  74 

 

Continu  No 

No  

Quarter

- 

41 

Governance 
Quality Index 
(DGQI) 

Ministries/ 
Department
s 

ous till 
reconsti 
tuted 
 

ly 

of 

of 

on 

objective 
a 

and  assessment  of 
data  preparedness  of 
the 
data/  MIS 
systems 
the 
Ministries/Departme
nts 
parameters 
standardized 
framework. 
 
To  prepare  a  self-
assessment 
diagnostic  tool  that 
will enable the M/Ds 
to 
internally 
contemplate the need 
for  improving  data 
systems. 
 
To 
commissioning 
agencies  to  conduct 
a 
comparative 
assessment  of  data 
preparedness 
and 
source  best  practices 
in  IT  systems  which 
can  enable  improved 
cross-learning 
between 
participating 
agencies. 

enable 

the 

the 

Price Statistics Division (PSD): 

A  statement  of  the  boards,  councils,  committees  and  other  bodies  consisting  of  two  or  more  persons 
constituted  as  its  part  or  for  the  purpose  of  its  advice,  and  as  to  whether  meetings  of  those  boards, 
councils,  committees  and  other  bodies  are  open  to  the  public,  or  the  minutes  of  such  meetings  are 
accessible for public: 

Sl. 
No. 

Name & 
address of 
the body 

Main functions 

Constitution of the 

of the body 

body 

Date of last 
constitution 

Date upto 

which 
valid 

Whether 
meetings 
open to 
public 

Whether 
minutes 
accessible 
to public 

Frequency 
of meeting 

Remarks 

23.05.2022 

2 years 

No 

No 

- 

from 
date of 

constitution 

As and 
when 

required 

1. 

Technical 
Advisory 
Committee 

Examination & 
recommendation 

D.G., CSO as 
chairman and 

to 

Sr. Officers from 

on 

the proposals 

Planning 

Statistics of 
Price & Cost 

made 

Commission, RBI, 

by the different 

M/O 

of Living 

central 

Agriculture, 

ministries/state 
governments for 

Finance, 
Labour 

42 

 

 

 

construction of 
different price 

&Employment, 
Commerce & 

indices; 

Industry, 

standardization 

Consumer Affairs, 

of 

Food & 

the concepts, 
definitions & 

Public Distribution, 

Statistics & PI, 

methods of price 

three State 

collection & 
compilation of 

indices, etc. 

representatives & 

Govt. 

two 

eminent 

academicians 
besides labour 

union & 

employers’ 
organizations 

representative (one 

each) 

as members 

Ex-DG, MoSPI as 
chairman and senior 
officers from NAD, 

FOD, JNU, M/o 

Agriculture, 

Finance, 

2. 

Expert 

Providing 

Committee 

guidance on 

on 

International 
Comparison 
Programme 
2021 Cycle 

various technical 
issues related to 

International 
Comparison 

Programme with 

representative of 

reference year 
2021. Aims at 

generating 
Purchasing 
Power Parity 

National Institute of 

Foreign Trade, 

Commerce Industry, 
CPWD & Engineers 

India Limited 

(PPP) for use as 

currency 

converter to 

compare the size 
and price levels 

of economies 

around the 

world. 

To carry out in 
depth exercises 
and recommend 

  

 

 

02.12.2021  Till the 

No 

No 

completion 

of ICP 

2021 Cycle 

As and 
when 

required 

 

 

43 

3. 

Expert 

Group for 

Base 

Former Director, CSO 
as chairman and senior 
officers from SDRD, 
Labour Bureau, M/o 

Revision of 

necessary 

CPI 

changes on the 
Base Revision of 

Commerce & 

Industry, DSIM & 

CPI 

JNU, 

27.02.2023  Till the 

No 

No 

As and 
when 

required 

completion 

of Base 
Revision 

Series 

Subordinate Statistical Service Division (SSS) 

S.No. 

Name & 
address 

of the body 

functions 

Constitution of the 

body 

Main 

of 

the body 

Date of 

last 

constitutio

n 

Date 
upto 
whic

h 

Whether 
meetings 

open 

to 

Whether 
minutes 
accessibl

e to 

valid 

public 

public 

Freque
ncy of 
meeting

s 

R
e 
m 
a
r
k
s 

44 

 

Additional Director 
General-Chairperson 

Deputy Director 
General-Member 

Deputy Secretary (SSS)-

Member 

Deputy Secretary 
(Admin)-Member 

Director General to be 

nominated by 

Secretary(S&PI)-

Chairperson. 

Additional Director 

General to be nominated 

by Secretary(S&PI)-

Chairperson 

SAG Level Officer 
Incharge of Admin, 

MoSPI-Member 

JAG Level Officer 

Incharge SSS Division, 
MoSPI-Non-Member & 

Convener. 

 

Joint Secretary (Admin)-

Chairman 

Director/Joint Director 

(SSS)-Member 
Deputy Secretary 
(Admin)-Member 

Deputy Director (SSS)-

Convener. 

DG (Stats), NSO, MoSPI 

-Chairperson 

ADG (FOD), NSO, 

MoSPI -Member 

ADG (NAD), NSO, 

MoSPI -Member 

Representative of D/o 

Disability Affairs 
MoSJ&E -Member 

Representative of PDU 

Institute for the 

Physically Handicapped 

-Member 

HoD, Psychiatry, Dr. 

RML Hospital -Member 

1. 

Departmental 

Promotion 
Committee 

(DPC) 

Recommen
dation of 
cases for 
Promotion 

2. 

Transfer and 

Placement 
Committee 

(TPC) 

Recommen
dation of 
transfer & 
posting of 

SSS 

officers 

3. 

Departmental 

Screening 
Committee 

(DSC) 

Recommen
dation for 
grant of 
financial 
upgradatio
n under 
Modified 
Assured 
Career 

Progressio
n (MACP). 

Committee for 
identification 

of Posts in 
SSS as per 
provision of 
RPwD Act, 

2016. 

Identificati
on of Posts 
in SSS as 

per 

provision 
of RPwD 
Act, 2016 

4. 

 

01.11.2023  N/A 

No 

No 

Yearly 

 

03.10.2023  N/A 

No 

No 

Need 
basis 

 

23.02.2022  N/A 

No 

No 

Half 
yearl

y 

 

N/A 

N/A 

No 

No 

Need 
basis 

 

45 

Recommen
dation for 
Confirmati

on, of 

probation 

of SSS 
Officers. 

Examine 

all requests 

received 
from SSS 
Officers 
regarding 

Institutions
/ attending 
a regular 

course 
outside 
office 

hours etc. 

Periodic 
Assessmen

t of 

Performan
ce of SSS 
Officers in 
the light of 
Rule 56J 

Director/Deputy 
Secretary (SSS), 

MoS&PI -Member 

Under Secretary/Deputy 
Director (SSS), MoS&PI 

-Member 

DDG(NAD)-Chairman 

Director/Deputy 

Secretary (SSS)-Member 
DDG/DD(FOD-Admin)-

Member 

DD(SSS)-Member 

Secretary. 

5. 

Screening 

Committee for 
Confirmation 
of in Service 

of SSO. 

N/A 

N/A 

No 

No 

Need 
basis 

 

6. 

Committee on 
Higher Studies 

N/A 

N/A 

No 

No 

Need 
basis 

 

Study 

Director/ Joint Director/ 

Programm
e/Joining 
educationa

DS (SSS)- Chairman 
DD (ISS)/US (ISS)-

Member 

l 

DD / Under Secretary 

(SSS)-Member 

Review 

Committee for 

Periodic 

Assessment of 
Performance 

7. 

of SSS 

Officers in the 
light of Rule 

56J. 

Joint Secretary (Admin)-

Chairman 

Director/Deputy 

Deputy Director (SSS)-

Member Secretary. 

 

Secretary-Member 

N/A 

N/A 

No 

No 

quart
ely 

 

IV. Inter, Intra & International Coordination Unit (IIICU) 

1 

Standing 
Committee for 
the 25th 
Conference of 
Central and State 
Statistical 

Considers all 
matters 
associated 
with 
organization 
of the 25th 

Chairman 
Chief Statistician of India and 
Secretary (S&PI) – 
MEMBERS: 
(II) Director General (Economic 
Statistics)  

16.10.
2017 

- 

No 

Need 
based 

- 

Available 
on 
MoSPI’s 
website 

46 

 

 

Organisations 
(COCSSO) 

 

COCSSO, 
follow-up on 
the 
recommendat
ions of the 
earlier 
COCSSOs 
and matters 
related 
thereto. 

(III) Addl. DG (CAP), CSO, 
MoSPI 
(iv)Addl. DG (SSD), CSO, 
MoSPI 
 (v) Shri A. Ayub, Dy. DG, 
NSSO(FOD)Bengaluru, 
(vi) Director, DES, Karnataka 
(vii) A representative from 
Directorate General of Foreign 
Trade  
(viii) A representative from 
Deptt. Of Industry Policy & 
Promotion 
(ix) A representative from 
Ministry of Mines 
(x) A representative from 
Ministry of labour and 
Employment  
(xi) A representative from 
Ministry of HRD 
(xii) A representative from 
Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare 
(xiii) A representative from 
Central Board of Excise & 
Customs 
(xiv) A representative from 
Central Board of Direct Taxes  
(xv) A representative from 
Ministry of corporate Affairs  
(xvi) Director, (CAP), CSO, 
MoSPI 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Constitution  of 
body 

the 

Date of last 
constitution 

Main 
functions 
of 
body 

the 

Date 
upto 
which 
valid 

Whether 
meetings 
open to 
public 

Whether 
minutes 
accessible 
to public 

Frequency 
of 
Meetings 

i. To 

i. CSI- cum - Secretary 

08.07.2021 

No 

No 

As and 
when 

required 

formulate all 

Steering 
Committ

policy 

directives 

(S&PI) - In chair 
ii. SS/AS & FA - 

Member 

ee 

related to the 

iii. DG (Statistics) - 

(HLSC) 
of SSS 

sub 

SSS sub 
scheme. 

 

scheme 

ii. To 

approve 
the MoUs 
delineating 

Member 

iv. DG (C&A) - 

Member 

v. DG (National 
Sample Survey) - 

Member 

vi. ADG (IIICU- In 

Till the 
end of 

the 

impleme
ntation of 
SSS sub 
scheme 

R
e
m
ar
ks 
 

47 

 

 

 
 

S. 
No. 

Name 
and 
Address 
of the 
body 

1 

High 
Level 

 

the State / 

charge SSPU) - 

programm

vii. ADG (NAD) - 

UT 

es 

Member 

Member 

containing 
activities 
proposed 

to be 

covered 

viii. ADG (SSD) - 

Member 

ix. ADG (SCD) - 

Member 

x. Representative of 

under SSS 
Scheme. 

NITI Aayog - Member 
xi. Representative of 

Department of 

Expenditure, Ministry 
of Finance - Member 

xii. Head of the DES of 

Gujarat - Member 

xiii. Head of the DES 
of Karnataka - Member 
xiv. Head of the DES 
of Rajasthan - Member 
xv. Head of the DES of 

Sikkim - Member 
xvi. DDG (SSPU) - 
Member Secretary 

 

iii. To 
approve 
the mid - 

term 

corrections
, if any in 
terms of 
various 
activities 

to be 

undertaken 

by the 

State/UT 

under 
various 

component
s, having 

total 

financial 
implication

s of re-

appropriati
on among 
component

s to the 
tune of 

above 25% 
of the total 
allocation 
of the State 
/ UT as per 
the signed 

MoUs 

under SSS 
Scheme. 

 

iv. HLSC 

may 

review the 
progress of 
implement
ation of 
overall 
scheme 

from time 
to time. 

 

48 

2 

i. To 

i. DG (C&A) – In chair 

08.07.2021 

NO 

NO 

 

As and 
when 

required 

Project 
Monito
ring 
Commi

ttee 

(PMC) 
of SSS 

sub 

scheme 

ii. ADG (IIICU- In 

charge SSPU) - 

iii. DDG (NAD) - 

iv. DDG (SSPU) - 

Member 

Member 

Member 

Member 

v. Director/DS(IFD) – 

vi. Director/JD(SSPU) 
– Member Secretary 

 

Till the 
end of 

the 

impleme
ntation of 
SSS sub 
scheme 

provide 
Technical 
Advice on 

State 

specific 

concerns in 
relation to 

day to 

day 

implement
ation of 
SSS sub 
Scheme 

and 

provide 
directions 
on matters 

which 
are not 

covered in 

the 

Operationa

Guidelines 
of the SSS 
Scheme. 

l 

 

ii. To 

approve 
the mid - 

term 

corrections
, if any in 
terms of 
various 
activities 

to 
be 

undertaken 

by the 

State /UT 

under 
various 

component
s, having 

total 

financial 
implication

s of re 

appropriati
on among 
component

s to the 
tune of 

upto 25% 
of the total 
allocation 

 

49 

3 

Steerin

28.03.2023 

-- 

NO 

NO 

 

As and 
when 

required 

g 

Commi
ttee on 
Quality 
Assura
nce 
Frame
work 

i. ADG, IIICU & 
SSPU, MoSPI - 

Chairperson 

ii. DDG (in charge 
coordination), NAD, 

MoSPI - Member 

iii. DDG, PSD, MoSPI 

t 

iv. DDG, ESD, MoSPI 

- Member 

- Member 

v. DDG, SCD, MoSPI - 

Member 

vi. DDG (IS wing), 

MoSPI- Member 
vii. DDG (SSPU), 
MoSPI- Member 

viii. DDG (PIMD) – 

interpretin

Member 

g the 

ix. Director (SSPU), 

MoSPI - Member 

Secretary 

of the 

State/UT 
as per the 

signed 
MoUs 

under SSS 
Scheme. 

 

iii. Any 

other 
matter 

related to 
the SSS 
Scheme 
i. Assess 

the 

implement
ation of the 
approved 
Internal 
Quality 

Assessmen

Framewor
k (IQAF) 
from time 
to time. 
ii. Guide 

divisions 

the 

in 

elements 
of IQAF to 
make them 
free from 
subjective 
interpretati
on, to the 

extent 

possible. 

iii. To 

suggest the 
applicabilit

y of the 

elements at 
NSO/Agen
cy/Product

- 

Process 
levels. 
iv. To 
suggest 
disaggrega

tion of 

elements in 

terms of 

 

50 

 

Techni

18.10.2023 

-- 

No 

No 

 

As and 
when 

required 

type of 
data, i.e. 
surveys, 

census and 
administrat

ive 

statistics. 

incidental 

v. Any 
other 
matter 

to the 
above. 

 

Evaluation 
of SSS sub 

Evaluat

scheme 

cal 

ion 

Commi

ttee 

(TEC) 
of SSS 

sub 

scheme 

i. ADG (IIICU & 
SSPU) - ln chair 

ii. DDG (Computer 
Centre) - Member 
iii. DDG (SSPU) - 

Member 

Member 

Member 

Member 

v. DDG (IIICU) - 

vi. DDG (PIMD) - 

iv. DDG (SCD- NSS) - 

vii. DS (lFD) - Member 
viii. Director (SSPU) - 

Convener 

National Statistical Systems Training Academy (NSSTA) 

Training Programme Approval Committee (TPAC) 

Hindi Section: 

 

 

 

51 

 

 

 

Manual- 9 

Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation 

Khurshid Lal Bhawan, Janpath Road, 

New Delhi-110001 

Website: - http://mospi.gov.in 
Right to Information Act, 2005 

 

Directory of Officers and Employees 

Computer Centre: 

East Block-10, Sector-1, R. K. Puram, New Delhi 

S.No. 

Name of the Officer 

Designation  

Landline No. 

Email ID 

Shri P.R. Meshram 

26107649    26160652 

 Addl. Director 
General 

Shri Rohit Bhardwaj 

   Ms Vandana Marwah 

DDG 

DDG 

26103956 

26107267 

adg.diid@mospi.gov.in 
pr.meshram@nic.in 

rohitb.rgi@nic.in 

vandana.marwah@gov.in 

Ms. Ambica Anand 
Chatterjee 

Director 

26163875 

ambica.anand@nic.in 

Shri Anil Chopra 

Joint Director 

26104559 

chopra.anil@nic.in 

   Ms. Anjana Dutt 

Joint Director 

26104559 

anjana.dutt@nic.in 

Shri P.S. Meena 

Joint Director 

26104559 

meena.ps@nic.in 

   Ms. Rashmi Sharma 

Joint Director 

26163875 

sharma.rashmi@nic.in 

Shri Amit Kumar 

Joint Director  

26194205 

amit.k89@gov.in 

Shri Manish Joon 

Deputy Director 

26104559 

manish.ncrb@gov.in 

Shri Karan Singh Tanwar  Deputy Director 

26194205 

tanwar.ks@gov.in 

1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

7. 

8. 

9. 

  

  

  

  

  

 

10.   

11.   

Shri Raghvendra Pandey  Assistant Director  26194205 

pandey.raghvendra@mospi.gov.in 

Directory of officers in Data Processing Division (DPD)and Data Processiong Centres (DPCs): 

Designation 
Assistant Director 
DDG 
Deputy Director 
Director 
Joint Director 

Centre 
DPC, Bangalore 
DPC, Bangalore 
DPC, Bangalore 
DPC, Bangalore 
DPC, Bangalore 

Mobile No 
9481844562 
9868888900 
8075086585 
9740771672 
9953547142 

52 

12. 

  

 

DPC, Bengaluru 
 
Name 
Shri R. Chinnaswamy 
Smt. P.A. Mini 
Smt. Amitha M. 
Smt. Praseeja P 
Smt. Anila Kumari T. 
 
 
DPC, Delhi 

Designation 
Assistant Director 
DDG 
Director 
Joint Director & HO 

Centre 
DPC, Delhi 
DPC, Delhi 
DPC, Delhi 
DPC, Delhi 

Mobile No 
8107424267 
9007435969 
9415636223 
9971569168 

Designation 
ADG 
Assistant Director 
Assistant Director 
DDG 
DDG 

DDG 

Deputy Director 
Deputy Director 
Deputy Director 
Deputy Director 
Director 
Director 
Director 
Joint Director 
Joint Director 
Joint Director 
Joint Director 

Centre 
DPD(HQ) 
DPD(HQ) 
DPD(HQ) 
DPD(HQ) 
DPD(HQ) 

DPD(HQ) 

DPD(HQ) 
DPD(HQ) 
DPD(HQ) 
DPD(HQ) 
DPD(HQ) 
DPD(HQ) 
DPD(HQ) 
DPD(HQ) 
DPD(HQ) 
DPD(HQ) 
DPD(HQ) 

Mobile No 
9903764724 
9830290182 
9433050856 
9432015354 
9038059675 

9433080259 
9821611648 
9582073588 
7599318664 
9830188103 
9432307762 
7838481654 
9447671417 
9007009311 
8240348445 
8486663565 
7001438281 

Mobile No 
9879167575 

9049059033 
 
8866750554 

Designation 

Centre 

Shri A.S. Chauhan 

Assistant Director 

DPC, Ahmedabad 

Smt. R.K. Mahida 

Assistant Director 

DPC, Ahmedabad 

7990458507 

Dr R.S. Jagtap 

Deputy Director General 

DPC, Ahmedabad 

Director 

DPC, Ahmedabad 

 
Name 
Shri Vikas Gurjar 
Shri Sanjib Basu 
Shri Jawaid Alam Khan 
Smt. Divya Chauhan 
 
 
DPD(HQ), Kolkata 
 
Name 
Smt. Pally Kundu(Burman) 
Shri Atanu Hait 
Smt. Aparajita Ray 
Shri Tarak Chandra Patra 
Shri N.K. Tudu 
Shri Salil Kumar 
Mukhopadhyay 
Ms. Sutapa Ghosh 
Ms. Chinneivah Haokip 
Shri Subhankar Pramanik 
Shri Surya Dasgupta 
Shri Monojit Das 
Shri Saurabh Kumar Dubey 
Shri N.N. Reji 
Shri Supriya Sarkar 
Smt. Shreya Sengupta 
Smt. Tandrima Chakraborty 
Shri Debashis Mandal 
 
 
DPC, Ahmedabad 
 
Name 

Shri L.M. Jadeja 
 
 
DPC, Giridih 
 
Name 
Shri Vinit Kumar 
 
 
DPC, Nagpur 
 
Name 
Shri A.P. Bhadange 
Shri Anis-UL Malik 
Shri Junaid Farooqui 

 

Designation 
Director 

Centre 
DPC, Giridih 

Mobile No 
9088093660 

Designation 
Assistant Director 
Assistant Director 
DDG 

Centre 
DPC,Nagpur 
DPC,Nagpur 
DPC,Nagpur 

Mobile No 
9422189453 
9424108110 
9820208320 

53 

Shri Sujeet Bapurao Pujari 
Shri P.K. Santosh 
 
Economic Statistics Division (ESD): 
 
Sr. 
No  

Room 
No. 

 Name 

 
Design
ation 

ADG (vacant since 01.08.2023) 

Deputy Director& HO 
Director 

DPC,Nagpur 
DPC,Nagpur 

7776048601 
9743018582 

Mobile 
No 

Email Id 

Tel. No 

Complete address 

Dr.  Pankaj 
Srivastava 

DDG 

511 

88006608
60 

ddgec.esd@
mospi.gov.in 

011-
23455511 

Smt. Anita 
Rawat 

PS to 
DDG 

509 

99683087
22 

anita.rawat9
9@gov.in 

011-
23455509 

DDG 

503 

N/A 

sis.naqvi@ni
c.in  

011-
23455503 

Shri Syed Iqbal 
Shuja Naqvi 

Shri Sanjay 
Kumar 

 Shri Ved Pal 
Singh 

Sh. Indradeep 
Roy Chowdhury 

Shri Deepak 
Dhanawat 

Shri Deepak 
kumar 

Directo
r 

 
Directo
r 
Joint 
Directo
r 
Joint 
Directo
r 
Dy. 
Directo
r 
Dy. 
Directo
r 
AD 

502 

404 

501 

504 

521B 

98103346
26 

sanjay.kuma
r79@gov.in 

011-
23455502 

98680902
20 

vp.sngh@nic
.in 

011-
23455404 

98749842
22 

indradeep.rc
@gov.in 

011-
23455501 

90797660
85 

87505855
43 

deepakdhana
wat.rgi@nic.
in 
kumar.deepa
k49@gov.in 

011-
23455504 

011-
23455552 

10  Ms. Alisha 

Khan 

521C 

N/A 

khan.alisha
@gov.in 

011-
23455553 

11  Ms. Vasumana 

519D 

Punj 

Sh. Ashok 
Kumar Singh 

Sh. Vivek 
Kumar Gaur 

AD 

521A 

98114267
35 

93343887
77 

vasumana.pu
nj.iss@mosp
i.gov.in 
ashok.singh1
964@gov.in  

SSO 

518 

78609757
65 

vivek.gaur57
39@gov.in 

011-
23455548 

(Work 
Station)  
011-
23455518  
011-
23455544 

Sh. Sunil Kumar 
Sahu 

SSO 

518 

91406388
27 

sunil.kumar1
981@gov.in 

Sh. Aparoop 
Bhattacharyya 

SSO 

518 

SSO 

518 

85870784
47 

98911355
06 

a.bhattachar
yya25@nic.i
n 
niraj.dwived
i@nic.in 

SSO 

518 

99587589
06 

aditya.singh
hada@nic.in 

Sh. Niraj 
Dwivedi 

Sh. Aditya 
Singh Hada 

5th Floor, Khurshid 
Lal Bhawan, Janpath 
, New Delhi - 110001 
5th Floor, Khurshid 
Lal Bhawan, Janpath 
, New Delhi - 110001 
5th Floor, Khurshid 
Lal Bhawan, Janpath 
, New Delhi - 110001 
5th Floor, Khurshid 
Lal Bhawan, Janpath 
, New Delhi - 110001 
4th Floor, Khurshid 
Lal Bhawan, Janpath 
, New Delhi - 110001 
5th Floor, Khurshid 
Lal Bhawan, Janpath 
, New Delhi - 110001 
5th Floor, Khurshid 
Lal Bhawan, Janpath 
, New Delhi - 110001 
5th Floor, Khurshid 
Lal Bhawan, Janpath 
, New Delhi - 110001 
5th Floor, Khurshid 
Lal Bhawan, Janpath 
, New Delhi - 110001 
5th Floor, Khurshid 
Lal Bhawan, Janpath 
, New Delhi - 110001 
5th Floor, Khurshid 
Lal Bhawan, Janpath 
, New Delhi - 110001 
5th Floor, Khurshid 
Lal Bhawan, Janpath 
, New Delhi - 110001 
5th Floor, Khurshid 
Lal Bhawan, Janpath 
, New Delhi - 110001 
5th Floor, Khurshid 
Lal Bhawan, Janpath 
, New Delhi - 110001 
5th Floor, Khurshid 
Lal Bhawan, Janpath 
, New Delhi - 110001 
5th Floor, Khurshid 
Lal Bhawan, Janpath 

54 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

12 

13 

14 

15 

16 

17 

 

18 

Sh. Vikas Goyal 

JSO 

518 

92687611
43 

vikas.goyal8
9@gov.in 

19 

Sh. Johney 
Tokas 

JSO 

518 

99998514
11 

johney.tokas
@gov.in 

20 

Sh. Haider Ali 

JSO 

518 

99907304
38 

haider.ali.nss
o@gov.in 

21 

22 

23 

Shri Virendra 
Pal 

JSO 

518 

94674767
87 

virender.pal
88@gov.in 

Sh. Pramod 
Ram 

Sh. Vijay 
Kumar 

JSO 

518 

81302131
04 

pramod.ram
84@gov.in 

JSO 

518 

75300007
27 

vijay.kumar
248@gov.in 

, New Delhi - 110001 

5th Floor, Khurshid 
Lal Bhawan, Janpath 
, New Delhi - 110001 
5th Floor, Khurshid 
Lal Bhawan, Janpath 
, New Delhi - 110001 
5th Floor, Khurshid 
Lal Bhawan, Janpath 
, New Delhi - 110001 
5th Floor, Khurshid 
Lal Bhawan, Janpath 
, New Delhi - 110001 
5th Floor, Khurshid 
Lal Bhawan, Janpath 
, New Delhi - 110001 
5th Floor, Khurshid 
Lal Bhawan, Janpath 
, New Delhi - 110001 

 
The updated officials' list of ESD, MoSPI has been communicated to the computer Centre from 
time to time for updating. 
 
National Accounts Division (NAD): 
 

Sr. 
No 

Room 
No. 

Designation  Name of Officer 
Sh./Smt./Ms./Dr. 

Intercom 

Email Id 

Dilip Kumar Sinha 

ddg4.nad@mospi.gov.in  

DDG 

DDG 

DDG 

DDG 

DDG 

Navanita Gogoi 

Brijendra Singh 

Subhra Sarker 

Rajeev Kumar 

navanita.gogoi@nic.in  

singh.brijendra@nic.in  

s.sarker@gov.in  

rajeevkumar.rgi@nic.in   

rohit.maurya86@nic.in  

vishal.iss34@gov.in  

Director 

Ankita Singh 

ankits.3782@gov.in  

Director 

Sarvadanand Barnwal 

Director 

Meera A P 

sanand.b@nic.in  

meera.ap@nic.in  

Director 

Kratika Mittal 

kratika.mittal@nic.in  

10. 

403 

11. 

423 

12. 

421 

Director 
Joint 
Director  

Joint 
Director  

Rohit Maurya 

Vishal Kumar  

Shrinivas Vijay Shirke 

sv.shirke@nic.in  

13. 

14. 

416-B 

417-B 

DD 

DD 

Priyanka S. Pant 

Manish Bindal 

priya.pant@gov.in  

manish.bindal84@gov.in  

412 

410 

405 

411 

407 

402 

424 

401 

422 

403 

423 

421 

449 

452 

1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

7. 

8. 

9. 

412 

410 

405 

411 

407 

402 

424 

401 

422 

 

55 

15. 

416 D 

DD 

Nikita Garg  

nikita.garg@gov.in  

16. 

17. 

18. 

19. 

416-B 

416 A 

417-A 

406-B 

DD 

AD 

AD 

AD 

Saumya Mishra 

Alisha Khanam 

Priyanka Anjoy 

Nigar Fatma  

mishra.saumya@gov.in  
alisha.mustafa@mospi.gov.in  

anjoy.priyanka@mospi.gov.in  

nigar.fatma@mospi.gov.in   

20. 

406-D 

AD 

Kirti Arora  

arora.kirti@mospi.gov.in  

400 

440 

416 

417 

441 

442 

 

 

 

 

 

Policy Implementation Monitoring Division (PIMD): 

Name  

Designation  

Email Id  

Contact No.  

Address  

Dr. Praveen 
Shukla  

Additional 
Director 
General  

praveen.shukla@ni
c.in 

Tel(O):011-
23455112 

Dr. Praveen Shukla  

Shri. Jeevan 
Chauhan 

Stenographer 
‘D’ to ADG 

jeevan.chauhan@m
ospi.gov.in 

Shri. Jeevan Chauhan 

Tel(O):011-
23455112 
Tel(O):011-
23455608 

Mob:9810530944 
Tel(O):011-
23455610 

Mob:9968074156 
Tel(O):011-
23455611 

Mob:9785899350 

Room No. 608, 6th Floor, 
Khurshid Lal Bhavan, Janpath, 
New Delhi - 110001  

Room No. 610, 6th Floor, 
Khurshid Lal Bhavan, Janpath, 
New Delhi - 110001  

Room No. 611B, 6th Floor, 
Khurshid Lal Bhavan, Janpath, 
New Delhi - 110001  

Room No. 610, 6th Floor, 
Khurshid Lal Bhavan, Janpath, 
New Delhi - 110001  
Room No. 610, 6th Floor, 
Khurshid Lal Bhavan, Janpath, 
New Delhi - 110001  
Room No. 610, 6th Floor, 
Khurshid Lal Bhavan, Janpath, 
New Delhi - 110001 

Dr. PANKAJ K P 
SHREYASKAR  

Deputy Director 
General  

pkp.shreyaskar@ni
c.in  

Smt. REKHA 
MALHOTRA  

PS to DDG  

rekha.malhotra@ni
c.in  

Ms. RENU 
VERMA  

Deputy Director  

renu.verma95@gov
.in  

Shri. HEMANT 
KUMAR  

Shri. MOHD 
AZHARUDDIN  

Shri. ANKIT 
KUMAR  

Senior 
Statistical 
Officer  
Junior 
Statistical 
Officer  
Junior 
Statistical 
Officer  

hemant.kumar81@
gov.in  

Mob:9811408351 

mohd.a06@gov.in   Mob:8010560506 

ankit.kumar20@go
v.in  

Mob.: 
8933040020 

Price Statistics Division (PSD): 
 

Directory of Officers and Employees: 

S.No. 

Name & Designation 

Sh. N. K. Santoshi, Additional Director General 
Ms. Deepti Srivastava, Deputy Director General 

Ms. Monami Mitra, Director 

Telephone (Office) 

011-23455114 
011-23455506 

011-23455527 

Sr. 
No.  

 

 

1  

2  

3  

4  

5  

6  

7  

8 

 

1. 
2. 

3. 

 

56 

Sh. Jose Kurian, Director 

Sh. Rohit Naagar, Deputy Director 

Ms. Anjali Yadav, Deputy Director 

Sh. Prasu Jain, Assistant Director 

4. 

5. 

6. 

7. 

  

 
Indian Statistical Services (ISS) Division: 

 
Sl No 

3. 

1 
2. 

Designation 

Section Officer 

Deputy Director 

Deputy Secretary 
Deputy Director 

Name of Officer 
(Shri/Smt./Dr.) 
Rajkumar 
Jitendra Kumar 
Verma 
Shri Arvind 
Kumar 
Namrata Goel 
Rakesh Kumar Jha  Senior Statistical Officer 
Senior Statistical Officer 
Ranjeet Kumar 
Senior Statistical Officer 
Ghanshyam 
Nikhil Khera 
Senior Statistical Officer 
Senior Statistical Officer 
Ajay Kumar 
Assistant Section Officer 
Prashant Kumar 
Junior Statistical Officer 
Reema Gupta 
Junior Statistical Officer 
Abhay Varshnay 
Siddhartha Singh 
Junior Statistical Officer 
Junior Statistical Officer 
Kush Agrawal 
Junior Statistical Officer 
Harish Sharma 
Junior Statistical Officer 
Ankit Goel 
Sagar Sharma 
Junior Statistical Officer 
Siddharth Khatri 
Junior Statistical Officer 
Avadhesh Kumar  MTS 
Vivek Kumar 
MTS 

4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
10. 
11. 
12. 
13. 
14. 
15. 
16. 
17. 
18. 
19. 
20. 
 
 
DIRECTORY OF DIVISIONS OF NSSO 
 
Survey Coordination Division (SCD), Delhi 
 

011-23455528 

011-23455547 

011-23455519 

011-23455546 

Contact Details 

Room No. 303                     Ph. No. 011-23455303 
Room No. 304-G                 Ph. No. 011-23455345 

Room No. 304-F                    Ph. No. 011-23455344 

Room No. 318                     Ph. No. 011-23455318 
Room No. 319                      Ph. No. 011-23455319 
Room No. 318                     Ph. No. 011-23455318 
Room No. 319                      Ph. No. 011-23455319 
Room No. 318                     Ph. No. 011-23455318 
Room No. 312                       Ph. No. 011-23455312 
Room No. 318                     Ph. No. 011-23455318 
Room No. 319                      Ph. No. 011-23455319 
Room No. 319                      Ph. No. 011-23455319 
Room No. 319                      Ph. No. 011-23455319 
Room No. 318                     Ph. No. 011-23455318 
Room No. 312                       Ph. No. 011-23455312 
Room No. 318                     Ph. No. 011-23455318 
Room No. 319                      Ph. No. 011-23455319 
Room No. 312                       Ph. No. 011-23455312 
Room No. 318                     Ph. No. 011-23455318 
Room No. 319                      Ph. No. 011-23455319 

Sl. 
No 

Name 

1. 

 Shri S. C. Malik 

2. 

 Shri M.S.S. Rao 

Designation 

Mobile No. 

e-mail id 

Additional Director 
General 
Deputy Director 
General 

9868470850 

malik.sc@nic.in 

9811774692 

mss.rao@gov.in 

 Ms. Noushida N.A 

Director 

8129436356 

noushida.na@gov.in 

 Shri Atul Kumar Sharma 

Joint Director 

9654048962 

atul.s68@nic.in 

 Dr. Ashish Saxena 

Joint Director 

8802916969 

ashish.saxena89@gov.in 

 Ms. Priyanka Kumari 

Deputy Director 

9680999559 

priyanka.mittal91@gov.in 

 Shri Nikhil Kumar 

Deputy Director 

9868578667 

nikhil.nik@nic.in 

 Shri Rahul Singh 

Assistant Director 

7355077689 

rahulsingh.iss42@mospi.gov.in 

57 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

7. 

8. 

 

Sl. 
No 

Name 

Designation 

Mobile No. 

e-mail id 

9. 

 Shri Puneet Shrivastava 

Assistant Director 

puneet.shrivastava@gov.in 

9425336274 
 

 
Survey Design and Research Division (SDRD), Kolkata: 
 
Sl. 
No 

Designation 

Name 

Mobile No. 

e-mail id 

Shri P. Sangeeth Kumar 

9447840966 

p.sangeeth@gov.in 

Shri Siddhartha Kundu 

9830569827 

s.kundu@nic.in 

3. 

Shri Nilanjan Chatterjee 

9903078634 

nilanjan.chatterjee@gov.in  

Dr. Amitava Saha 

9831077504 

a.saha.dgcis@nic.in 

Shri Onkar Prosad Ghosh 

7044272617 

onkar.ghosh@gov.in 

Additional Director 
General 

Deputy Director 
General 

Deputy Director 
General 

Deputy Director 
General 

Deputy Director 
General  

Deputy Director 
General  

Dr. Sourav Chakrabortty 

9874420616 

c.sourav35@gov.in 

Shri Uttam Kumar Majee  Director 

9831818686 

u.maji.dgcis@nic.in 

Shri Avishek Guha 

Director 

8420330874 

ag.dgcis@nic.in 

Shri Sandip Mazumder 

Director 

8240532091 

s.mazumder@nic.in 

Shri Soumya Roy 

Director 

9433220559 

sr.dgcis@nic.in 

Smt. Swagata Mitra 

Joint Director 

8981512916 

mitra.swagata@gov.in 

Shri Sandip Kumar 
Sadhu 

Joint Director 

9647795800 

sadhu.sk@gov.in 

Sri Sumanta Chakraborty 

Joint Director 

8587809185 

s.chakraborty82@tribal.gov.in 

Dr. Rupam Kr. Sarkar 

Joint Director 

9868437546 

rupamkumar.s@nic.in 

Shri Piyush Kr. Singh 

15 
16  Mrs. Ishita Das 
17  Miss Priya Devwanshi 
18 

Shri Kousik Dhara 

Shri Gopal Saha 

Shri Shyamal Kumar 
Kotal 

Miss Sonakhya 
Somaddar 

Deputy Director 

Deputy Director 

Deputy Director 

Deputy Director 

Deputy Director 

8095627306 

piyushkmr.singh88@gov.in 

9830743487 

ishita.das90@gov.in 

9560119109 

priya.devi21@gov.in 

9433566781 

kousik.dhara@gov.in 

9749084047 

Saha.gopal@gov.in 

Assistant Director 

9477115855 

kotal.shyamal@gov.in 

Assistant Director 

9163998387 

sonakhya.ww@mospi.gov.in 

Sri Manas Kr. Banerjee 

Assistant Director 

9474000811 

manask.banerjee@gov.in 

Sri Preetam Sen 

Assistant Director 

7278045560 

preetam.sen@mospi.gov.in 

Sm. Bhavna Mishra 

Assistant Director 

8707538194 

bhavna.mishra@gov.in 

 
Data Processing Division (DPD), Headquarters Kolkata 
 

Sl. 
No. 

Name 

1. 

Smt. Pally Kundu 
 

Designation 

Mobile No. 

e-mail id 

Additional Director 
General 

9903764724 

pally.kundu@gov.in 

1. 

2. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

7. 

8 

9. 

10. 

11 

12 

13 

14 

19 

20 

21 

22 

23 

24 

 

58 

9432015354 
 
9038059675 
 
9810048152 
 
9836529870 
 
9447671417 
8240348445 
 
9007009311 
 
8486663565 
 
7001438281 
 
9821611648 
9582073588 
 
8920449150 
 
9830188103 
 
9830290182 
9433050856 

Sl. 
No. 

Name 

Designation 

Mobile No. 

e-mail id 

9433080259 

salil.kumar59@gov.in 

Shri Salil Kumar 
 
Mukhopadhyay 
Shri Tarak Chandra Patra 
 

Shri Nimat kumar Tudu 
 

Shri Saurabh Kumar Dubey 
 

Shri Monojit Das 
 

 Shri N. N. Reji 
Smt. Shreya Sengupta 
 

Shri Supriya Sarkar 
 

Deputy Director 
General 
Deputy Director 
General 
Deputy Director 
General & HOD 
Director 

Director 

Director 
Joint Director 

Joint Director 

tc.patra@gov.in 

nimat_iss@yahoo.com 

skumar.dubey@nic.in 

monojit.das82@gov.in 

nnreji@ibm.gov.in 
sengupta.shreya@gov.in 

s.sarkar.dgcis@nic.in 

Dr. Tandrima Chakraborty 

Joint Director 

tandrima.c@gov.in 

Shri Debashish Mandal 

Joint Director 

d.mandal.dgcis@gov.in 

12.   Smt. Sutapa Ghosh 

Ms. Chinneivah Haokip 

Deputy Director 
Deputy Director 

sutapa.ghosh@gov.in 
chinneivah.haokip@gov.in 

Shri Subhankar Pramanik 

Deputy Director 

subhankar.pramanik@nic.in 

Shri Surya Dasgupta 

Deputy Director 

dasgupta.surya@gov.in 

16.   Shri Atanu Hait 
17.   Smt. Aparajita Ray 

Assistant Director 
Assistant Director 

atanu.hait@gov.in 
aparajita.ray@gov.in 

Designation 

Mobile No. 

e-mail id 

Deputy Director 
General 

9049059033 

jagtap.rs@gov.in 

Director 

8866750554 

lm.jadeja@gov.in 

3. 

  Shri. A S Chauhan 

Assistant Director 

9879167575 

anjani.chauhan@gov.in 

 
Data Processing Centre, Ahmedabad 
 

Sl. 
No. 

Name 

1. 

  Dr. Rahul S. Jagtap 

2. 

 

Shri. Lakhadhirsinh M. 
Jadeja 

 
Data Processing Centre, Bengaluru 
 

Sl. 
No. 

Name 

Designation 

Mobile No. 

e-mail id 

1. 

2. 
3. 

4. 

 Ms. P.A. Mini 

DDG 

 Smt.. Praseeja P. 
 Smt. Anilakumari T. 

Director 
Joint Director 

 Smt. Amitha M 

Deputy Director 

9868888900 

9740771672 
9953547142 

9496766232 

pamini.rgi@nic.in 

praseeja.p@gov.in 
anila.kumari@nic.in 

amitha.m90@gov.in 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

7. 

8. 

9. 

10.   

11.   

13.   

14.   

15.   

 

59 

Sl. 
No. 

Name 

Designation 

Mobile No. 

e-mail id 

5. 

 R. Chinnaswamy 

Assistant Director 

9481844562 

chinnaswamy.r67@gov.i
n 

Designation 

Mobile No. 

e-mail id 

Deputy Director 
General 
Director 
Joint Director 

9007435969 

9415636223 
9971569168 

s.basu.dgcis@nic.in 
 
Jawaidalam.khan@gov.in 
divya.c@nic.in 

 
Data Processing Centre, Delhi 
 

Sl. 
No. 

Name 

1. 

  Shri Sanjib Basu 

2. 
3. 

  Mr. Jawaid Alam Khan 
  Smt. Divya Chauhan 

 
Data Processing Centre, Giridih 
 

Sl. 
No. 

Name 

and in-charge 
Director 

2. 

 Shri Vinit Kumar 

 
Data Processing Centre, Nagpur 
 
Sl. 
No. 

Name 

Designation 

Mobile No. 

e-mail id 

1. 

 Shri Nimat Kumar Tudu  Deputy Director General 

9038059675 

 nimat_iss@yahoo.com 

9088093660 

vinit.jindal67@gov.in 

Designation 

Mobile No. 

e-mail id 

 Mr. Junaid Farooqui 

Deputy Director General 

9820208320 

junaid.farooqui@gov.in 

 Shri P.K. Santosh 
 Shri Sujeet Bapurao Pujari  Deputy Director 

Director 

9947034240 
9960499525 

pk.santhohosh70@gov.in 
sujeet.pujari88@gov.in 

 
Data Processing Division, IS Wing 
 
Sl. 
No. 

Name 

 Dr. Akshaya Kumar 
Panigrahi 

 Shri Somnath Jana 

Joint Director 

 Shri Somen Chowdhury 

Under Secretary 

 Shri Bappa Karmakar 

Deputy Director 

 Shri Ranabir De 

Deputy Director 

Field Operations Division, Headquarters Delhi 

Designation 

Mobile No. 

e-mail id 

 Shri Soumya Chakraborty 

Deputy Director General 

9830919145 

soumya.chakraborty@gov.in 

Director 

9681017855 

a.panigrahi@nic.in 

 Ms. Ankita Mondal 

Assistant Director 

ankita.mondal21@mospi.gov.in 

9433315563 

9051685130 

9503367871 

8617249881 

8617209125 

somnath.jana@gov.in 

s.chowdhury@nic.in 

k.bappa@gov.in 

ranabir.de@gov.in 

Name 

Designation 

Mobile No. 

e-mail id 

1. 

 Subhas Chandra Malik  Additional Director 

9868470850 

malik.sc@nic.in 

1. 

2. 
3. 

1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

7. 

Sl. 
No. 

 

 

 

60 

Sl. 
No. 

Name 

Designation 

Mobile No. 

e-mail id 

2. 

6. 

4. 

3. 

5. 

 
Kanchana V Ghosh  
 
Chetna Shukla  
 
Arun kumar Yadav 
 
Praveen Shukla  
 Raushan  Kumar 
Choudhary  
 Shivaji Narasu Patil 
 R P S Rathore  
 Supriya Saxena 

7. 
8. 
9. 
10.   Balram  
11.   Ajay Kumar 
12.   Ujjval Srivastava 
13.   Erashree Gautam 
14.   Suman Patel 
15.   Atul Kumar Singh 
16.   Kuldeep Aswal 
17.   V Rama Krishna 
18.   Divyanshu Mishra 
19.   Kalpna 
20.   Kamlesh Kumar 
21.   Nausheen Musharraf 
22.   

Ramesh Chand 

General 

Deputy Director 
General 
Deputy Director 
General 
Deputy Director 
General 
Deputy Director 
General 
Deputy Director 
General 
Director 
Joint Director 
Joint Director 
Deputy Director 
Deputy Director 
Deputy Director 
Deputy Director 
Deputy Director 
Deputy Director 
Deputy Director 
Assistant Director 
Assistant Director 
Assistant Director 
Assistant Director 
Assistant Director 
Assistant Director 
(Rajbhasha) 

9717098884 

kanchana.ghosh@nic.in 

8588818294 

chetna.shukla@nic.in 

8800500350 

arun.ky@nic.in 

9958677355 

praveen.shukla@nic.in 

9455038455 
9540976674 
9958444614 
9968303313 
9929704160 
8010532363 
9473563855 
9151564565 
8448010685 
7897115065 
9540357913 
9247401989 
6393720005 
7838043410 
7506245576 
9670282761 

raushan.choudhury@gov.in 
shivaji.patil@dcmsme.gov.in 
r.rathore@gov.in 
supriya.saxena@gov.in 
balram.36@gov.in 
ajaykumar.bcas@nic.in 
srivastava.ujjaval@gov.in 
erashree.gautam@gov.in 
suman.patel93@gov.in 
atul.singh25@gov.in 
aswalji.kuldeep@gov.in 
vrama.krishna66@gov.in 
mishra.divyanshu@mospi.gov.in 
kalpna.iss@mospi.gov.in 
kamleshrathore018@gmail.com 
nausheen235@gmail.com 

9816332202 

ramech.chand@gov.in 

 
 
Agricultural Statistics (AS) Wing, FOD, Faridabad 
 

Name 

Designation 

Mobile No. 

e-mail id 

Deputy Director 
General  
Joint Director  

9582214174 

nitika.gupta77@gov.in 

9968825220 

sudhir.kumar15@nic.in 

Assistant Director  

7836835183 

ramudit.choudhary64@gov.in  

Name 

Designation 

Mobile No. 

e-mail id 

1. 

 
Dr. Hansraj Yadav 

Deputy Director 
General  

9928366998  

hansraj.iss@gmail.in 

61 

1. 

2. 
3. 

 
Smt. Nitika Gupta  

 Shri Sudhir Kumar  
 Shri Ram Udit 
Choudhary 

 
Zonal Offices, FOD 
 
North Zone, Jaipur 
 

Sl. 
No. 

Sl. 
No. 

 

 

East Zone, Kolkata 
 

 
West Zone, Nagpur 
 

 
South Zone, Bengaluru 
 

1. 

 
Saji George 

 
Central Zone, Nagpur 
 

Name 

Designation 

Mobile No. 

e-mail id 

1. 

 
Dr. Bandana Sen 

Deputy Director 
General  

9836053887 

bandana.sen25@gov.in 

Name 

Designation 

Mobile No. 

e-mail id 

1. 

 
Shri Srinivas Uppala 

Deputy Director 
General  

9561213896  

srinivas.uppala@gov.in 

Name 

Designation 

Mobile No. 

e-mail id 

Deputy Director 
General  

9422415684 

saji.george@gov.in 

Name 

Designation 

Mobile No. 

e-mail id 

1. 

 
Shri C.S. Mishra 

Deputy Director 
General  

8005073000 

cs.mishra69@gov.in 

 
North East Zone, Guwahati 
 

Name 

Designation 

Mobile No. 

e-mail id 

1. 

 Shri Jishnu Datta 

Deputy Director 

9958881988 

jishnu.datta@gov.in 

 
Subordinate Statistical Service Division: (SSS): 
 

Sr. 
No 

Room 
No. 

Designation 

1. 

309 

JS (Admin) 

Intercom 

Email Id 

Name of Officer 
Sh./Smt./Ms./Dr. 

Shri Tanweer Qamar 
Mohammad 

Shri Sunil Kumar Jassal 

Shri Mohammad Tayyab 

Shri Mahalingraya 

Shri Arjun Lal Bairwa 

Ms. Neha Sharma 

Shri Abhiket 

Ms Roli 

Ms. Meenakshi 

309 

523 

414 

414 

322 

322 

322 

322 

322 

523 

414 

414 

321 

321 

321 

321 

321 

DS 

DD 

DD 

SSO 

SSO 

SSO 

SSO 

SSO 

tq.mohammad@gov.in  

sunil.jassal@gov.in 

mtayyab.edu@gov.in  

mahalinga.93@gov.in 

arjun.lalbairwa@nic.in  

neha.sharma49@nic.in 

abhiket.44@gov.in 

Roli.88@gov.in 

meenakshi.44@nic.in 

Sl. 
No. 

Sl. 
No. 

Sl. 
No. 

Sl. 
No. 

Sl. 
No. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

7. 

8. 

9. 

 

62 

SSO 

JSO 

JSO 

JSO 

JSO 

JSO 

JSO 

JSO 

10.  321 

11.  321 

12.  321 

13.  321 

14.  321 

15.  321 

16.  321 

17.  321 

 
 

 
Ms. Harleen Bisht 

Shri Rahul Sharma 

Shri Rajeev Kumar 

Shri Ravi Prakash 

Ms. Deepika 

Shri Neeraj Parashar 

Shri Vishal Garg 

Shri Vivek Bansal 

322 

322 

322 

322 

322 

322 

322 

322 

harleen.birdi48@gov.in 

rahul.sharma1989@gov.in 

rajeev.kmr53@gov.in 

ravi.prakash1990@gov.in 

deepika.rawat92@mospi.gov.in 

neer.parashar@mospi.gov.in 

jso.vishal@mospi.gov.in 

vivek201065.kb@karmayogi.in 

PROGRAMME IMPLEMENTION WING: 
 

Infrastructure and Project Monitoring Division (IPMD): 

1.  Sh. Alok Shekhar, Additional Secretary 
2.  Sh. Arindam Modak, DDG(PI) 
4.  Mrs. Ruchi Sharma, Joint Director (IPMD) 
5.  Ms. Rinki Gupta, Deputy Director 
6.   Ms. Avinash Kumari, Deputy Director 

011-23742567 
011-23455200 
011-23455604 
011-23455425 
011-23455425  

 
 
 
 
 

 

Members of Parliament Local Area Development Division (MPLADS): 
 

Sl.No.  Name & Designation 
1. 

Sh. Arindam Modak, DDG (PI) 

Telephone (O) 
23455200 

Email address  
arindam[dot]modak[at]gov[dot]in 

Sh. Ashish Kumar Gupta, Director 

23455308 

akgupta2[at]ord[dot]gov[dot]in 

Sh. Manoj Kumar Verma, Director  

23455419 

manojverma[dot]edu[at]nic[dot]in 

Sh. Sunil Kumar Jha, Under Secretary  23455427 
Sh. Vikas Nigam, Deputy Director 
23455426 

sk[dot]jha29[at]gov[dot]in 
vikas[dot]nigam90[at]gov[dot]in 

Ms. Neelima Elizabeth, Under 
Secretary 

23455614 

nebeck[at]prasarbharati[dot]gov[dot]in 

Ms. Rupali Gupta, Deputy Director,   23455426 

gupta[dot]rupali[at]gov[dot]in 

Sh. Anil Kataria, Under Secretary,  

23455304 

anil[dot]kataria35[at]gov[dot]in 

Ms. Bharti Gautam, Sr. Statistical 
Officer 

Sh. Nitin Ranjan, Sr. Statistical 
Officer 

Sh. Nikhil Sharma, Sr. Statistical 
Officer 

Sh. Rajeev Nandan Choudhary, 
A.S.O. 
Sh. Robin Verma, Asstt. Section 
Officer 
Sh Dhirendar Chauhan, J.S.O. 

Sh. Vivek Kumar, Jr. Statistical 
Officer 
Sh. Amit Shukla, Jr. Statistical Officer   

  

Sh. Satyendra Kumar, J.S.O. 

Ms Shikha Maurya, J.S.O. 

Sh Ajit Jain, J.S.O. 

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

bharti[dot]gautam[at]nic[dot]in  

 nitin[dot]ranjan[at]nic[dot]in 

 nikhil[dot]sharma26[at]gov[dot]in 

 rajivnandan[dot]c[at]nic[dot]in  

robin[dot]1994[at]mospi[dot]gov[dot]in 

dhirender[dot]90[at]nic[dot]in 

 vivek[dot]65143[at]mospi[dot]gov[dot]in 

amit[dot]shukla93[at]mospi[dot]gov[dot]in  

 satyendra[dot]kumar91[at]mospi[dot]gov[dot]in 

 maurya[dot]08[at]gov[dot]in 

 jain[dot]ajit27[at]mospi[dot]gov[dot]in 

63 

2. 

3. 

4. 
5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

10 

11 

12 

13 

14 

15 

16 

17 

18 

19 

 

20 

Sh Sumit Agarwal, J.S.O. 

  

sumit[dot]agrawal792[at]mospi[dot]gov[dot]in 

Inter, Intra, International coordination Unit 
 

Name & Designation 

Landline No. 

e-mail 

Sl. 
No. 
1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

7. 

8. 

9. 

10. 

Shri Ghan Shyam, ADG (IIICU) 

Shri P.K.Sharma, PPS to ADG (IIICU) 

23455117 
  23455117  

Shri. Chandradeep Kumar Jha, DDG, (IIICU) 

23455231 

Smt. Rajni Mathur, PS to DDG(IIICU) 

23455231 

Shri Cyriac George , Director (IIICU)  

Ms. Remya P. , Joint Director(IIICU)  

Shri Randhir Singh Rawat , Under Secretary, 
(IIICU) 
Ms. Shrutimala Rajbongshi, Deputy Director, 
(IIICU)  
Ms. Aisha Saeed, Deputy Director, (IIICU) 

Shri Shantanu Dixit, Deputy Director, (IIICU)  

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

 
- 

- 
- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

 
 
Training Division: 

Sl. 
No. 

Name 

Designation 

Telecom 

e-mail id 

1. 

Sh. Sumedh Nagrare 

Sh. Gyanendra Pratap Singh 

2. 
3.  Ms. Himani Mehta 

ADG 

JD 
DD 

23455115 

26054919 
- 

adg.trg@mospi.gov.in 

singh.gp@gov.in 
- 

National Statistical Systems Training Academy (NSSTA) 

 

64 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation 

Khurshid Lal Bhawan, Janpath Road, 

Manual- 10 

New Delhi-110001 

Website: - http://mospi.gov.in 
Right to Information Act, 2005 

 

Posts and Pay Scale 

Computer Centre: 

Sl. No. 

Posts 

Additional Director General 

Director 

Joint Director 

Deputy Director 

Assistant Director 

Senior Statistical Officer 

Junior Statistical Officer 

Pay Level 

15 

13 

12 

11 

10 

7 

6 

Economic Statistics Division (ESD): 

 S.No.  Group 

Post 

strength 

Present in position 

Pay Scales (as per 7 the CPC) 

Vacant Since 1.8.2023 

182200-224100, Level -15 

Deputy Director 

3* 

67700-208700, level-11 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

A 

A 

A 

A 

A 

A 

B 

B 

ADG 

DDG 

Director 

JD 

Assist. Director 

SSO 

JSO 

Total 

2 

2 

2 

2 

5 

6 

22 

* One Deputy Director is on long leave. 

Policy Implementation Monitoring Division (PIMD): 

144200-218200, Level -14 

123100-215900, level-13 

78800-209200, level-12 

56100-177500, Level-10 

44900-142400, Level-7 

35400-112400, Level-6 

 

1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

7. 

  

 

 

65 

Posts 

S. 
No. 
1.  Additional Director 

General 

182200-224100  15 

Pay 

Pay Band (Rs)  Grade 

Pay Level 

Basic Pay (Rs) 

2.  Deputy Director 

144200-218200  14 

General 
Joint Director 

3. 
4.  Deputy Director 
5. 
6. 

PS 
Senior Statistical 
Officer 
Junior Statistical 
Officer 
8. 
Stenographer ‘D’ 
9.  Multi Task Staff 

7. 

78800-209200 
67700-208700 
56100-177500 
44900-142400 

12 
11 
10 
7 

35400-112400 

6 

41100 

25500-81100 
21700-69100 

4 
3 

25500 
37200 

211300 
  
  
  
157600 

- 
67700 
87400 
52000 

Additional 
Director General 

Deputy Director 
General 
Joint Director 
Deputy Director 
PS 
Senior Statistical 
Officer 
Junior Statistical 
Officer 
Stenographer ‘D’ 
Multi Task Staff 

National Statistical Systems Training Academy (NSSTA) 

Price Statistics Division (PSD): 

Posts and Pay Scale: 

Sl. No Posts 

Additional Director General 
Deputy Director General 
Director 
Deputy Director 
Assistant Director 

1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 

  

Sr. No. 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 

Designation 
Deputy Director General 
Director 
Joint Director 
Deputy Director 
Assistant Director 
Senior Statistical Officer 
Junior Statistical Officer 

 

 

 

 

Pay Band (Rs) 

67000-79000 
37400-67000 
37400-67000 
15600-39100 
15600-39100 

Level (As per   7th 
cpc) 
15 
14 
13 
11 
10 

Pay-scale 
Level-14 
Level-13 
Level-12 
Level-11 
Level-10 
Level-7/8 
Level-6 

66 

Manual- 11 

Ministry of Statistics & Programme Implementation 

Khurshid Lal Bhawan, Janpath Road 

New Delhi - 110001 

Website: - http://mospi.gov.in 
Right to Information Act, 2005 

 

The budget allocated to each of agency, indicating the particulars of all plans, proposed 

Expenditures and reports on disbursements made 

National Statistical Systems Training Academy (NSSTA) 

Details of allocation of budget in BE 2023-24 for NSSTA under Scheme & Non-scheme 
both are as below: 

Capacity Development Scheme 

Object Head 

S.No. 

Type of Exp. 

B.E 2023-24 

Code 

Description 

01 
05 
06 
09 

11 

13 
19 

26 

27 

28 

29 

31 

40 

49 

71 

72 

Salaries 
Rewards 

Medical Treatment  
Training Expenses 
Domestic Travel 
Expenses 
Office Expenses 
Digital Equipment 
Advertising & 
Publicity 
Minor Civil & 
Electrical Work 
Professional 
Services 
Repair & 
Maintenance 
Grant in aid(MH-
3454) 

Award & Prizes 
Other Revenue 
Expenditure 
ICT equipment* 
Building and 
Structure 

  

  

4.00 
715.00 

100.00 
495.00 
10.00 

6.00 

240.00 

30.93 

39.00 

30.00 

22.75 

25.00 
7.00 

100.00 

Revenue 

Capital 

1 
2 
3 
4 

5 

6 
7 

8 

9 

10 

11 

12 

13 

14 

15 

16 

 

 

67 

Total 

1824.68 

Non-Scheme 

Object Head 

S.No 

Type of Exp. 

B.E 2023-24 

Code 

Descriptions 

Revenue 

1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 

Total 

Salary 
Rewards 

01 
05 
06  Medical Treatment  
07 
08 
09 
11 

Allowances 
LTC 
Training Expenses 
DTE 

507.23 
0.35 
6.50 
273.13 
11.89 
0.65 
1.08 

800.83 

Policy Implementation Monitoring Division (PIMD): 

 The budget of PIMD is allocated as per the budget allocation of MoSPI. 

Price Statistics Division (PSD): 

Information on Budget Allocation of PSD, MoSPI under CD Scheme of CSO(HQ). 

BE 2022-23 (In INR) 

RE 2022-23 (In INR) 

BE 2023-24 (In INR) 

57,74,000 

50,08,000 

68,00,000 

Members of Parliament Local Area Development Division (MPLADS): 

  

BE 2023-24 

RE 2023-24 

Sl.No.  Division 

Scheme 

Non-

Total 

Scheme 

Non-

Total 

1.  MPLADS 

PLAN 

3958.50 

Plan 

3958.50 

Scheme 

 

Scheme 

 

(In Rupees Crores) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

 

68 

Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation 

Khurshid Lal Bhawan, Janpath Road 

New Delhi-110001 

Website: - http://mospi.gov.in 
Right to Information Act, 2005 

Manual- 12 

The manner of execution of subsidy programmes, including the amounts allocated and the 

details of beneficiaries of such programmes 

The Ministry including the National Statistical Commission and NSSTA does not have any 
subsidy programmes in operation. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

69 

  

 

Manual- 13 

Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation 

Khurshid Lal Bhawan, Janpath Road, 

New Delhi-110001 

Website: - http://mospi.gov.in 
Right to Information Act, 2005 

Particulars of recipients of concessions, permits or authorizations granted 

The  Ministry  of  Statistics  and  Programme  Implementation  including  the  National  Statistical 
Commission has no provisions for granting concessions, permits or authorizations. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

70 

 

Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation 

Khurshid Lal Bhawan, Janpath Road 

Manual- 14 

New Delhi-110001 

Website: -http: // mospi.gov.in 
Right to Information Act, 2005 

 

electronic form 

Details in respect of the information, available to or held by this Ministry, reduced in an 

Computer Centre: 

MoSPI’s  website  (https://www.mospi.gov.in)  provides  an  integrated  digital  experience  to 

users. Apart from providing information about Ministry’s role, activities, contacts, etc., the 

website is a platform having all the statistical publications/ reports, data and dashboards of 

MoSPI. Advance release calendar of MoSPI products and related press release are put up on 

the web-site maintaining the Special Data Dissemination Standards. Quarterly Estimates of 

GDP  for  Q2  FY  2023-24  released  on  30.11.2023  have  been  converted  into  SDMX  and 

disseminated through the Ministry’s website.  Monthly Consumer Price Index (CPI) is being 

converted and disseminated in SDMX format from the website. 

 Economic Statistics Division (ESD): 

All publications of the IIP and Classifications Unit and the Energy Statistics Unit of ESD are 
available in electronic form on the website of the Ministry and are free of cost. 

Title 

Sl. 
No 
1.  National Industrial Classification, 2008 
Classification 
2.  National 

Product 

Manufacturing Sector, 2011 

Price 

Non-priced 
Non-priced 

– 

3.  National  Product  Classification  –  Services 

Non-priced 

Sector, 2010 

4.  Energy Statistics India 2023 

Non-priced 

National Account Division (NAD): 

71 

  

 

  

 

 

Presently all the publication of National accounts Division is available of Ministries website 
free of cost. 

Procedure for procurement of National Accounts data: 

For soft copies of publications on national accounts statistics on  CDs, users are requested to 
approach  the  Additional  Director  General  (National  Accounts  Division),  National  Accounts 
Division, Ministry of Statistics and P.I., Khursheed Lal Bhavan, Janpath, New Delhi-110 001 
with: 

•  A demand draft for the requisite amount (mentioned below), payable in favour of Pay 

and Accounts Officer, Ministry of Statistics and P.I., New Delhi, and 

•  A requisition for the data with the undertaking that the contents of the publication will 
not be passed on either wholly or partially with or without profit to any other data user 
or disseminator of data with or without commercial purpose. 

Policy Implementation Monitoring Division (PIMD): 

S. No.   Title 

1. 
2. 

3. 

Administrative Data: Issues, Concerns and Prospects 
Data  Dissemination:  National  Metadata  Structure  (NMDS) 
For Statistical Products 
Product-wise Compliance of Metadata 

Price 
Not priced 
Not priced 

Not priced 

Procedure for access: 

The  above  said  documents  are  available  on 
ttps://mospi.gov.in/meta-data-standards and are accessible for general public free of cost. 

the  MoSPI’s  official  website  at 

Price Statistics Division (PSD): 

Publication in electronic form:  

1.  Current  Series  (Base  2012=100)-  available  from  January,  2013  onward  and  Back 
Series(Base 2012=100)- available        from January, 2011 up-to May, 2013, the details of the 
type of Indices are given below: 

a.  Time series of Consumer Price Indices - 

•  Monthly  All  India  Indices  and  Inflation  rates  (in  percentage)  of  Rural,  Urban  and 

Combined sectors at Group and Subgroup level 

•  State  wise  Group  Indices  and  Inflation  rates  (in  percentage)  of  Rural,  Urban  and 
Combined sectors for all the states/UTs and Subgroup level Indices and inflation rates 
(in percentage) of major 22 states of India 

b.  All India Item level Indices and Inflation rates (In percentage) of the Combined sector 

 

 

 

 

72 

2.  Old  Series  (Base  2010=100)-  available  from  January,  2011  up-to  December,  2014,  the 
details of the type of Indices are given below: 

a.  Time series of Consumer Price Indices - 

•  Monthly  All  India  Indices  and  Inflation  rates  (in  percentage)  of  Rural,  Urban  and 

Combined sectors at Group and Subgroup level 

•  State  wise  Group  Indices  and  Inflation  rates  (in  percentage)  of  Rural,  Urban  and 
Combined sectors for all the states/UTs and Subgroup level Indices and inflation rates 
(in percentage) of major 22 states of India 

    b. All India Item level Indices and Inflation rates (In percentage) of the Combined sector 

Technical Reports: 

(TAC on SPCL) 

1.  Report  of  Technical  Advisory  Committee  on  Statistics  of  Prices  &  Cost  of  Living 

2.  Document on Changes in Revised series (Base 2010=100 to 2012=100) 

These documents are placed on the website of the Ministry also for public access. 

 Subordinate Statistical Services (SSS): 

(a)  E-Publications: 
Sl. 
No. 

Title 

SSS Civil List 

SSS Officer’s Seniority List 

Price 

Non Priced 

Non Priced 

Infrastructure and Project Monitoring Division (IPMD): 

1.  Monthly Flash Report on Central Sector Projects costing 

Non Priced 

Rs. 150 crore and above 

2.  Monthly Review Report on Infrastructure Performance 
3.  Quarterly Project Implementation Status Report on 

Non Priced 
Non Priced 

Central Sector Projects costing Rs. 150 crore and above   

Members of Parliament Local Area Development Division (MPLADS): 

The  information  in  respect  of  MPLADS  Division  is  already  available  in  the  web  portal 
mplads.gov.in.  

National Statistical Systems Training Academy (NSSTA) 

Minutes of the TPAC 

 

73 

1. 

2. 

 

  

 

 

 

Manual- 15 

Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation 

Khurshid Lal Bhawan, Janpath Road, 

New Delhi-110001 

Website: - http://mospi.gov.in 
Right to Information Act, 2005 

The particulars of facilities available to citizens for obtaining information, including the 

working hours of a library or reading room, if maintained for public use 

 

 

Computer Centre: 

Data  Preservation  and  Dissemination:  -  The  Computer  Centre  of  the  Ministry  has  been 
entrusted  with  the  responsibility  of  preservation  and  dissemination  of  large  volume  of  data 
generated through various socio-economic surveys, Enterprise Surveys, Economic Censuses, 
Annual  Survey  of  Industries  and  these  data  sets  are  disseminated  online  freely  from  the 
MoSPI website (www.mospi.gov.in) since April 2019. 

  
Website Address  (http://www.mospi.gov.in):- The Web-site of the Ministry of Statistics and 
Programme Implementation is being maintained by the Computer Centre. The Press Releases 
are uploaded on the same day. Other materials are also uploaded in the shortest possible time 
after necessary editing and preparation. The Centre has uploaded all the latest reports brought 
out  by  the  Ministry  (more  than  1500)  on  its  website.  Any  user  either  within  the  country  or 
from outside the country can access these reports. 
   

Policy Implementation Monitoring Division (PIMD): 
 
Website  Address  (https://mospi.gov.in/meta-data-standards):-The  Division  concerned  of  the 
Ministry  has  uploaded  all  the  documents  mentioned  in  Manual  14  on  its  website.  Any  user 
either within the country or from  outside the country can access  these reports though online 
visit. The user can download either part or full report if he/she wants. 
 
Members of Parliament Local Area Development Division (MPLADS): 

The  information  at  Constituency/  State/  District  level  about  grants  and  utilization  of 
MPLADS fund and details of works (as reported by the concerned nodal district authorities of 
the MPs) are in public domain and available on the website: ww.mplads.gov.in   

National Statistical Systems Training Academy (NSSTA): 

Library:  The  working  hours  of  the  Library  are  from  10.00  A.M.  to  5.00  P.M.  (Monday  to 
Friday). 

 

 

 

 

74 

Manual- 16 

Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation 

Khurshid Lal Bhawan, Janpath Road, 

New Delhi-110001 

Website: - http://mospi.gov.in 
Right to Information Act, 2005 

 

List of the designated Appellate Authority/ Nodal officer/ Central Public Information 

Officers and the Assistance Public Information Officers for 

the Ministry: 

Computer centre: 

CPIO: 

Name:         Shri K. Khatminthang,  
Designation: Under Secretary  
Email:          k.khatminthang@nic.in 
Phone:        011-26105074 
Address:      East Block-10, Sector-1, R. K. Puram, New Delhi – 110066. 
 

FAA: 

Name:         Shri Anil Chopra 

Designation: Joint Director 

Email:          chopra.anil@nic.in 

Address:      East Block-10, Sector-1, R. K. Puram, New Delhi – 110066. 

 
CPIOs in Data Processing Divisions and DPCs outside Delhi: 
 

Name/Designation/e-mail id/Address & Tele Fax 

Jurisdiction 

  Director, CPIO, Data Processing Division  (HQ), 

NSSO, Mahalanobis Bhavan, 164 GLT Road, 
Kolkata-700108, dpdcsw@gmail.com, Ph.- 033 
25788685 

Data Processing Division 
(HQ), NSSO, Kolkata. 

2. 

3. 

  Director, CPIO, Data Processing Centre, Ahmedabad, 
7th  floor,  Lila  Mani  corporate  heights,  Ramapir  NO. 
Tekro,  dpcamd@yahoo.in,    Ph-07929700661 

  Director, CPIO,  C.G.O. Complex, B Block, 6th Floor, 
  dpc.ngp-

Seminary  Hills,  Nagpur  –  440006, 
nsso@gov.in , ph-071 22511582. 

4. 

  Director, CPIO,  Data Processing Centre, NSSO,  

3rd Floor, F-Wing 

Data Processing Centre, 
NSSO, Ahmedabad. 

Data Processing Centre, 
NSSO, Nagpur. 

Data Processing Centre, 
NSSO,  

Sl. 
No. 
1. 

 

75 

Kendriya Sadan, Koramangola 
Bangalore  –  560034.  dpc.nsso-kar@nic.in,  Ph-080 
25522732.   

Bengaluru. 

5. 

  Director, CPIO,  Data Processing Centre, NSSO, 

Data Processing Centre, 
NSSO, Giridih. 

National Sample Survey Office 
Data Processing Division 
A.J. Bose Road, Rose Villa 
Giridih – 815 301. 
dpcentregiridih@yahoo.in 

 
CPIOs in Data Processing Centre Delhi: 
 

Sl. 
No. 
1. 

Name/Designation/e-mail id/Address & Tele Fax 

Jurisdiction 

  Director,  CPIO, Data Processing Division 

Sankhyiki Bhavan, GPOA Building at CBD 
Shahdara 
Near Karkardooma Court 
MaharshiValmiki Marg 
New Delhi – 110 032. dpcdelhi.admn@gmail.com  

Data Processing Division, 
New Delhi 
 

Economic Statistics Division (ESD): 

The  following  officers  of  ESD  have  been  designated  as  Central  Public  Information  (CPIO) 
and First Appellate Authorities (FAA) under the RTI Act, 2005 concerning ESD information. 

Division/ Section 
/Unit 

 Central Public Information 
Officer (CPIO) 

First Appellate Authorities 
(FAA) 

Economic Statistics 
Division (ESD) 

Ms. Alisha Khan,  
Deputy Director, 
Email ID: khan.alisha@gov.in 
 Phone no.011-23455548 

 Shri Ved Pal Singh, 
Director, 
Email ID: vp.sngh@nic.in 
Phone no.011-23455404 

National Accounts Division (NAD): 

Division 

First Appellate Authority 

C

National Account 

Shri Manish Bindal, Deputy 

Smt. Ankita Singh, Director 

Division (NAD) 

Central Public Information 

Officer (CPIO) 

Director 
Email id: 

manish.bindal84@gov.in;  
Office Telephone No. 011-

23455452, Mob. No. 

9896503503 

Address: NAD, NSO, MoS&PI, 

Email id: ankits.3782@gov.in 

Office Telephone No. 011-

23455402, Mob. No. 

9958382036 Address: NAD, 

NSO, MoS&PI, K.L. Bhawan, 

 

 

 

76 

K.L. Bhawan, Janpath, New 

Janpath, New Delhi-01 

Delhi-01 

Indian Statistical Services (ISS):   

As per office order No-I-34011/1/2009-RTI dated 19.12.2023 

Survey Coordination Division (SCD): 

Central Public Information Officers (CPIO) of NSSO 

 

Name of division 

CPIO 

First Appellate Authority 

SCD 

FOD 

SDRD 

DPD, HQ 

DPC, Ahmedabad 

Ms. Priyanka Kumari,  

Shri Atul Kumar Sharma,  

Deputy Director,  

Director, 

 

 

 

 

 

 

First Floor, C block, Sankhyiki 

First Floor, C block, Sankhyiki 

Bhawan, New Delhi 
Shri Kuldeep Aswal, 

Deputy Director, 

Bhawan, New Delhi 
Shri R.P.S. Rathore,  

Joint Director, 

NSSO (FOD) HQ, Sankhyiki 

NSSO (FOD) HQ, Sankhyiki 

Bhawan, New Delhi 
Shri Avishek Guha,  

Director 

Bhawan, New Delhi 

Shri Siddhartha Kundu,  
Deputy Director General 

Mahalanobis Bhawan, Kolkata 

Mahalanobis Bhawan, Kolkata 

Shri Monojit Das,  

Director 

Mahalanobis Bhawan, 164 

G.L.T. Road, Kolkata-700108 
Shri Lakhadhirsinh M. Jadeja, 

Director 

Shri Nimat Kumar Tudu, 
Deputy Director General, 
Mahalanobis Bhawan, 164 

G.L.T. Road, Kolkata-700108  

Dr. Rahul S. Jagtap, 

Deputy Director General, 

7th Floor, Lilamani Corporate 
Heigths, BRTS Road, Vadaj, 

7th Floor, Lilamani Corporate 
Heigths, BRTS Road, Vadaj, 

Ahmedabad-380013 

Smt. Praseeja P., 

Director 

Ahmedabad-380013 

Smt. SP.A Mini, 

Deputy Director General 

DPC, Bengaluru 

3rd floor, F-Wing, Kendirya 

3rd floor, F-Wing, Kendirya 

Sadan, Kormangala, Bangalore-

Sadan, Kormangala, Bangalore-

DPC, Giridih 

Shri Vinit Kumar, 

560 034 

Director 

A.J.C. Bose Rosd, Rose Villa, 
Giridih, (Jharkhand)-815301 

560 034 

Shri Nimat Kumar Tudu, 
Deputy Director General 
Mahalanobis Bhawan, 164 

G.L.T. Road, Kolkata-700108  

 

 

77 

DPC, Nagpur 

DPD, IS Wing 

Shri P.K Santosh, 

Director 

6-8th Floor, B Block CGO 
Complex, Seminary Hills, 

Nagpur 440006 

Dr Akshaya Kumar Panigrahi, 

Director 

 

Mr. Junaid Farooqui, 

Deputy Director General  
6-8th Floor, B Block CGO 
Complex, Seminary Hills, 

Nagpur 440006 

Shri Nimat Kumar Tudu, 
Deputy Director General 

 

1-Council House Street, 

Mahalanobis Bhawan, 164 

Kolkata-700001 

G.L.T. Road, Kolkata-700108  

Mr. Jawaid Alam Khan, 

Shri Sanjib Basu, 

Director 

Deputy Director General 

DPC, Delhi 

2nd Floor, B-block, Sankhyiki 

2nd Floor, B-block, Sankhyiki 

Bhawan, Maharshi Valmiki 

Bhawan, Maharshi Valmiki 

Marg, Delhi-110032 

Marg, Delhi-110032 

Policy Implementation Monitoring Division (PIMD): 

Designated  Name of 

Designation  Office Address 

E-mail 

Contact No. 

the 

Officer 

First 
Appellate 
Authority 

Dr.  Pankaj 
KP 
Shreyaskar 

Deputy 
Director 
General 

2. 

Central 
Public 
Information 
Officer 

Ms.  Renu 
Verma 

Deputy 
Director 

ID 

pkp.shrey
askar@ni
c.in 

renu.ver
ma95@g
ov.in 

Tel(O):011-
23455608 

Mob:981053
0944 

 
Tel(O):011-
23455611 

Mob:978589
9350 

Room No. 608, 
6th Floor, 
Khurshid Lal 
Bhavan, Janpath, 
New Delhi - 
110001  

Room  No.  611B, 
6th 
Floor, 
Khurshid 
Lal 
Bhavan,  Janpath, 
New  Delhi 
- 
110001 

Price Statistical Division (PSD): 

 DESINATED  NUMBER 

Name of the   official 

First Appellate 
Authority 

CPIO 

1 

1 

Sh. Jose Kurian, Director 

Sh. Rohit Naagar, Deputy Director 

 

S.N
o. 

1. 

SL. 
NO 

 

1 

2 

  

 

 

78 

Subordinate Statistical Service Division (SSS): 

First Appellate Authority: 

Shri Sunil Kumar Jassal, Dy. Secretary 

Email id: sunil.jassal@gov.in 

Address: 523, 5th Floor, MoS&PI, K.L. Bhawan, Janpath, New Delhi-01 

 

CPIO: 

Shri Mohammad Tayyab, Deputy Director 

Email id: mtayyab.edu@gov.in 

Address: 414, 4th Floor, MoS&PI, K.L. Bhawan, Janpath, New Delhi-01 

Infrastructure and Project Monitoring Division (IPMD): 

1.  Mrs. Ruchi Sharma, Joint Director 

Room No. 605, Khurshid Lal Bhawan, New Delhi-110001 
Email id – dir-ipmd@mospi.gov.in 
Phone No. -011- 23455605 

Matters relating to 
Infrastructure & Project 
Monitoring Division 
(IPMD). 

Members of Parliament Local Area Development Division (MPLADS): 

Sl. No. 

Name of Officer  

Designation  

Function  

1. 

2. 

3. 

Shri Vikash Nigam  

Deputy Director  

CPIO  

Ms. Rupali Gupta 

Deputy Director  

CPIO  

Shri Manoj Kumar Verma  

Director  

First Appellate 
Authority  

National Statistics Commission (NSC): 

CPIO 

Dr. Chiranjeevi Gudala, DD, 

National Statistical Commission Secretariat, 

Level-4, East Block-6, 
R. K. Puram, Sector-1, 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

79 

New Delhi-110066 

e-mail id: deputydirector-nsc@ mospi.gov.in 

 
Intra, Inter and International Coordination Unit (IIICU): 

 

 

Ms Shrutimala Rajbongshi 

Deputy Director 

Intra, Inter and International Coordination Unit (IIICU) 

Khurshiud lal Bhawan, Janpath, New Delhi – 110001 

Email id: rajbongshi.shruti@gov.in 

(a)  Matters  related  to 
coordination 
with 
Divisions  of  MoSPI, 
Central  Ministries  and 
International 
Organizations and 

(b)  Matters  related  to 
administration of ISI 

National Statistical Systems Training Academy (NSSTA): 

First Appellate Authority: Dr. Jitendra Singh Tomar. Director, NSSTA 

CPIO: Sunil Kumar Patel, Deputy Director, NSSTA 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

80 

Manual- 17 

Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation 

Khurshid Lal Bhawan, Janpath Road, 

New Delhi-110001 

website:- http://mospi.gov.in 

Right to Information Act, 2005 

Such other information as may be prescribed 

 

 

MPLADS 

All other information as may be prescribed by Government of India for dissemination shall be 

collated, tabulated, compiled, collected and provided in the form of manual from time to time. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

81 

 

MANPOWER OF ECONOMIC STATISTICS DIVISION (ESD), MoSPI 

Annexure I 

 

 

ADG= Additional Director General, 

DDG= Deputy Director General, 

JD= Joint Director, 

DD= Deputy Director,  

AD=Assistant Director, 

SSO=Senior Statistical Officer, 

JSO=Junior Statistical Officer. 

 

 

82 

D K Sinha 

 

 

 

 

ADG of NAD 

Rajeev Kumar 

Navanita Gogoi 

Subhra Sarker 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Organisation Chart of National Accounts Division (NAD): 

DDG Of NAD  

Work  

Brijendra Singh 

ACNAS,  Base  Year  Revision,  Sources  and  Methods; 
other  Committees/  Working  Groups  etc.,  IT  related 
matters  including  NIIP.  ,  Private  Corporate  Sector; 
Sequence of Accounts of Private Corporate Sector. 

Advance,  Provisional  and  QGDP  Estimates;  SDDS, 
Implementation  of  2008  SNA,  Press  Note  on  First 
Revised  Estimates;  Publication  of  NAS,  Material  for 
Annual  Report,  Supply  of  data,  Public  Sector 
(undertakings); Financial Services. 

Supply  &  Use  Tables,  Input–Output  Transaction 
Tables;  International  Comparison  Programme  (ICP); 
National  Accounting  Framework  for  Blue  Economy, 
Parliament  Questions;  Parliament  matters,  General 
Coordination, 
  Hindi/AAP/B&F,  Training  and 
Internship, matters n.e.c 

Public Sector(Budgets), DCUs, Local Body Accounts, 
Public  Administration  and  Railways,  Private  Final 
Consumption Expenditure, NPISH Satellite A/Cs, All 
Non-financial  Services  (excl.  Railways  and  Public 
administration); Workforce Estimates, Construction & 
Capital Formation, Savings, Capital Stock and CFC. 

, 

  Forestry,  Fishing 

Agriculture, 
  Library  and 
Documentation,  RTI,  Mining,  Manufacturing, 
Electricity,  Gas,  Water  Supply  &  Other  Utility 
Services,  Employment  Outlook  Report,  State 
Coordination; SDP; State level Capital Formation, 

83 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

ORGANISATION CHART of NSSO 

MoS (IC) 

CSI & Secretary 

DG (NSS) 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 
 
 
 

 

84 

ADG (SCD) 

ADG (FOD) 

ADG (SDRD) 

ADG (DPD) 

        

   

              

 

Policy Implementation Monitoring Division (PIMD) : Organization Chart 

 

 

MOS (I/C) 

CSI & SECRETARY 

DIRECTOR GENERAL 
(COORDINATION & 
ADMINISTRATION) 

ADDITIONAL 

DIRECTOR GENERAL 

(PIMD) 

DEPUTY DIRECTOR 
GENERAL (PIMD) 

 

 

JOINT DIRECTOR 

(VACANT) 

DEPUTY DIRECTOR 1 

DY. DIRECTOR 2 

(VACANT) 

SR. STATISTICAL 

OFFICER 2 
(VACANT) 

SR. STATISTICAL 

OFFICER 1 

JUNIOR 

STATISTICAL 
OFFICER 1 

JUNIOR 

STATISTICAL 
OFFICER 2 

 

 

 

 

85 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

National Statistics Commission (NSC): 

MEMBER 1

MEMBER 2

MEMBER 3

MEMBER 4

CEO, NITI 

Aayog.

CHAIRPERSON

Secy to NSC

&CS I

DDG (NSC 
Secretariat)

Director

 

 

86 

National Statistical Systems Training Academy (NSSTA): 

ADG, Training 

Division

DDG/ Director/ JD

Training Unit

DDG

NSSTA

Director

Deputy Director/ 
Assistant Director

SSO/ JSO

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

87 

Dos and Don’ts for Central Public Information Officer (CPIO) 

Dos 

The Central Public Information Officer shall: - 

Annexure-II 

1.  Deal  with  requests  from  persons  seeking  information  and  render  reasonable  assistance  to 
such 

persons.                                                                                                                [Section 5 (3) 
of RTI Act, 2005] 

2. Take assistance, if required, of any other officer for proper discharge of his/her duties. 

[Section 5 (4 & 5) of RTI Act, 2005] 

3. Accept request in writing or through electronic means in English or Hindi or in the official 
language  of  the  concerned  area,  accompanying  the  prescribed  fee  and  where  such  request 
cannot  be  made  in  writing,  the  Central  PIO  shall  provide  all  reasonable  assistance  to  the 
person  making 
request 
[Section 5 (6)(1) of RTI Act, 2005] 

reduce 

orally 

same 

the 

the 

to 

4. Transfer the application or part of it to the public  authority concerned if subject matter of 
the 

application is not related to this Ministry under immediate intimation to the applicant within 
five days 

from the date of receipt of the application.                                                     [Section 5 (6)(3) 
of RTI Act, 2005] 

5. provide information as quickly as possible and in any case within 30 days from the date of 
receipt 

of request or reject the request for any reasons as specified in Section 8 & 9 of RTI Act, 2005. 
Where 

the information sought for concerns the life or liberty of a person, the same shall be provided 
within 48 

hours of the receipt of the request.                                                                       [Section 7(1) of 
RTI Act, 2005] 

88 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

in  writing.                                                                                                        

6. be deemed to have refused the request, if the information sought for is not provided within 
30 

days from the date of receipt of request.                                                              [Section 7(2) of 
RTI Act, 2005] 

7. intimate the applicant the details of the enhanced fee, if any, in addition to normal fee. 

          [Section 7(3) of RTI Act, 2005] 

8. assist to enable access to the information, including assistance for proper inspection, where 
access 

to  the  record  or  a  part  thereof  is  required  to  be  provided  specially  to  the  sensorily  disabled 
persons. 

[Section 7(4) of RTI Act, 2005] 

9.  allow  access  information  in  the  printed  or  in  any  electronic  format  on  payment  of 
prescribed fee. 

No fee shall be charged from the person who is below the poverty line. 

[Section 7(5) of RTI Act, 2005] 

10.  provide  information  free  of  charge,  if  a  public  authority  fails  to  provide  information 
within 30 days 

from the date of the receipt of the request. 

[Section 7(6) of RTI Act, 2005] 

11. consider the representation, if any, made by a third party, before taking any decision. 

[Section 7(7) of RTI Act, 2005] 

12. intimate the requester, the reasons for rejection, the period within which an appeal against 

rejection  may  be  preferred  and  particulars  of  the  appellate  authority,  in  case  the  request  is 
rejected. 

[Section 7(8) of RTI Act, 2005] 

13.  provide  information  in  the  form  in  which  it  has  been  sought  unless  it  would 
disproportionately 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

89 

divert  the  resources  of  the  public  authority  or  would  be  detrimental  to  the  safety  or 
preservation of the 

record in question.                                                                                                [Section 7(9) 
of RTI Act, 2005] 

14.  provide  the  information  related  to  decision  of  Council  of  Ministers,  the  reasons  thereof, 
and the 

material on the basis of which the decisions were taken, after the decision has been taken and 
the matter 

is complete, or over.                                                                                          [Section 8(1) (i) 
of RTI Act, 2005] 

15. provide such information which cannot be denied to the Parliament. 

[Section 8(1) (j) of RTI Act, 2005] 

16.  allow  to  access  information  relating  to  the  Official  Secrets  Act,  1923  and  any  of  the 
exemptions 

permissible  in  accordance  with  sub-section  (1)  of  section  (8)  of  RTI  Act  2005,  if  public 
interest is 

involved and disclosure of which do not affect the protected interests. 

[Section 8(2) of RTI Act, 2005] 

17. provide any information relating to any occurrence, event or matter which has taken place, 

occurred or happened twenty years before the date on which any request is made. 

[Section 8(3) of RTI Act, 2005] 

18. reject a request for information if the request for providing access is involved the matter 
relating to 

copyright subsisting in a person other than the State.                                               [Section 9 
of RTI Act, 2005] 

19.  serve  a  notice  to  the  applicant,  if  access  to  a  part  of  the  record  which  is  exempt  from 
disclosure, 

intimating  (a)  that  only  part  of  the  record  requested;  (b)  reasons  for  decision;  (c)  the  names 
and 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

90 

designation of the person given the decision; (d) the details of the fee’s calculation to which 
the 

applicant is to deposit; and (e) his or her right to review the decision regarding non-disclosure 
of part of 

the information, the amount of fee charged or the form of access provided. 

[Section 10 of RTI Act, 2005] 

20. disclose, if intends, the information which is confidential in nature provided by the third 
party 

after  obtaining  the  views  of  the  third  party  in  writing  or  orally  within  five  days  from  the 
receipt of the 

request.                                                                                                               [Section 11 (1) 
of RTI Act, 2005] 

21. serve a notice to the third party to make representation against the proposed disclosure. 

[Section 11 (3) of RTI Act, 2005] 

22. provide information within forty days after receipt of the request if the third party is given 
an 

opportunity  to  make  representation  on  a  decision  as  to  whether  or  not  to  disclose  the 
information or 

record or part thereof and give in writing the notice of his decision to the third party. 

[Section 11 (3) of RTI Act, 2005] 

Don’ts 

The Central Public Information Officer shall not: - 

1. ask an applicant making request for information to give any reason for requesting the 

information  or  any  other  personal  details  except  those  that  may  be  necessary  for  contacting 
him. 

[Section 6 (2) of RTI Act, 2005] 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

91 

2.  be  obliged  to  give  any  citizen,  -  (a)  information,  disclosure  of  which  would  prejudicially 
affect 

the sovereignty and integrity of India, the security, strategic, scientific or economic interests 
of the 

State, relation with foreign State or lead to incitement of an offence (b) information which has 
been 

expressly forbidden to be published by any court of law or tribunal or the disclosure of which 
may 

constitute contempt of court (c) information, the disclosure of which would cause a breach of 

privilege  of  Parliament  or  the  State  Legislature  (d)  information  including  commercial 
confidence, 

trade  secrets  or  intellectual  property,  the  disclosure  of  which  would  harm  the  competitive 
position of 

a third party, unless the competent authority is satisfied that larger public interest warrants the 

disclosure  of  such  information  (e)  information  available  to  a  person  in  his  fiduciary 
relationship, 

unless  the  competent  authority  is  satisfied  that  the  larger  public  interest  warrants  the 
disclosure of 

such  information  (f)  information  received  in  confidence  from  foreign  Government  (g) 
information, 

the disclosure of which  would endanger the life  or physical  safety of  any person or identify 
the 

source  of  information  or  assistance  given  in  confidence  for  law  enforcement  or  security 
purposes (h) 

information which would impede the process of investigation or apprehension or prosecution 
of 

offenders (i) cabinet papers including records of deliberations of the Council of Ministers, 

Secretaries  and  other  officers  (j)  information  which  relates  to  personal  information  the 
disclosure of 

which has no relationship to any public activity or interest, or which would cause unwarranted 

invasion of the privacy of the individual unless the Central Public Information Officer or the 

appellate authority, as the case may be, is satisfied that the larger public interest justifies the 

disclosure of such information.                                                                           [Section 8 (1) of 
RTI Act, 2005] 

 

92 

